

===== PDF PAGE 1 =====

1 
 
Optical Characterization of Single Plasmonic Nanoparticles 
 
Jana Olson1, Sergio Dominguez-Medina1, Anneli Hoggard1, Lin-Yung Wang1, Wei-Shun 
Chang1*, Stephan Link1,2* 
 
1Department of Chemistry, 2Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Laboratory for 
Nanophotonics, Rice University, Houston, Texas 77005, United States 
 
*Address correspondence to: wschang@rice.edu; slink@rice.edu 
 
Abstract 
This tutorial review surveys the optical properties of plasmonic nanoparticles studied by various 
single particle spectroscopy techniques. The surface plasmon resonance of metallic nanoparticles 
depends sensitively on the nanoparticle geometry and its environment, with even relatively 
minor deviations causing significant changes in the optical spectrum. Because for chemically 
prepared nanoparticles a distribution of their size and shape is inherent, ensemble spectra of such 
samples are inhomogeneously broadened, hiding the properties of the individual nanoparticles. 
The ability to measure one nanoparticle at a time using single particle spectroscopy can 
overcome this limitation. This review provides an overview of different steady-state single 
particle spectroscopy techniques that provide detailed insight into the spectral characteristics of 
plasmonic nanoparticles. 
  

===== PDF PAGE 2 =====

2 
 
Key learning points: 
(1) Optical properties of localized surface plasmon resonances modeled by Mie and Gans 
theory. 
(2) Single nanoparticle spectroscopy using scattering, absorption and extinction methods. 
(3) Strategies to correlate images between optical and electron microscopes. 
(4) Characterization of metallic nanostructures by super-resolution fluorescence microscopy.  
(5) Damping of surface plasmons extracted from the homogenous linewidth. 
 
1. Introduction 
The color of metallic nanoparticles is caused by a phenomenon known as the localized surface 
plasmon resonance,1, 2 the collective oscillation of the conduction band electrons induced by 
incident electromagnetic radiation, as schematically demonstrated in Fig. 1A. Compared to bulk 
plasma oscillations in metals, the resonance of surface plasmons is shifted to lower energies, as 
imposed by the boundary conditions of the small nanoparticles with large surface to volume 
ratios.  The spectral characteristics of the localized surface plasmon resonance are fully 
determined by the physical parameters of the system: the size, shape, and material of the 
nanoparticle, as well as the refractive index of its surroundings. Many exciting research 
directions have emerged in plasmonics taking advantage of the tunability of the localized surface 
plasmon resonance, including surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS),3 plasmonic tags 
and particle-based therapies,4 analyte sensing,5, 6 or catalysis,7 among many others.  
 The parameters that govern the plasmon re sponse have been extensively studied using 
ensemble spectroscopy techniques, which provide average values of resonance energies and 
plasmon linewidths that are broadened by an often inhomogeneous size and shape distribution, 

===== PDF PAGE 3 =====

3 
 
especially for nanoparticles prepared by chemical synthesis methods.1 To characterize the optical 
properties of plasmonic nanoparticles free from size and shape dispersion, many different single 
particle spectroscopy methods have been developed based on nanoparticle scattering,8-14 
absorption,15-19 or extinction.20-24 Single particle spectra furthermore allow for the quantitative 
comparison to theory, especially when combined with correlated electron microscopy, which 
yield details regarding the morphology of the nanostructure.25 With the knowledge gained 
through single particle spectroscopy and detailed modeling, the performance of plasmonic 
nanoparticles in various application has been optimized. 
 The goal of this tutorial review is to in troduce the reader to current approaches for 
studying the steady-state optical properties of single plasmonic nanoparticles, rather than 
addressing the many different applications, for which we refer to an extensive body of other 
review articles.3-7 We also focus here on individual plasmonic nanoparticles instead of coupled 
systems, which have been extensively reviewed.26 This review is organized as follows. We first 
introduce analytical models that describe the plasmon resonance as they provide the most 
physical insight into the interaction of metallic nanoparticles and light and allow us to define 
scattering, absorption, and extinction. We then review single particle methods that are based on 
these three processes, and discuss strategies to correlate optical spectroscopy with electron 
microscopy as well as recent advances in super-resolution fluorescence imaging to obtain sub-
diffraction limited optical images. Finally, as one of the most important aspect of single particle 
spectroscopy, we discuss the homogeneous linewidth of the plasmon resonance and how it 
relates to plasmon resonance sensing.  
 
 

===== PDF PAGE 4 =====

4 
 
2. Electromagnetic Modeling: Mie and Gans Theory 
With electromagnetic radiation incident upon a plasmonic nanoparticle, photons can be 
absorbed by the nanoparticle and transferred into heat and luminescence, or they can be scattered 
in all directions. Both processes can be quantified by the absorption and scattering cross sections, 
which are defined as the effective area over which the nanoparticle absorbs or scatters light.  At 
the resonance maximum, a plasmonic nanoparticle can absorb and scatter light from a much 
larger area than its physical size. The sum of these two processes is termed extinction and 
characterizes the total loss that the incident radiation undergoes. The optical cross sections of the 
nanoparticles as a function of energy, i.e. spectra, are dominated by the localized surface 
plasmon resonance. The peak position and the width of this resonance are determined by the size 
and shape of the nanoparticle as well as the dielectric surrounding environment.  
For spherically-shaped nanoparticles, the far-field spectrum can be analytically calculated 
by solving Maxwell’s equations using a series expansion of spherical harmonic wave equations, 
known as Mie theory.1, 2 The solution is composed of different order modes l, from the lowest 
dipolar (ൌ1) and quadrupolar (ൌ2) modes to higher order multipoles. For a nanoparticle of 
radius ܴwith a frequency-dependent complex dielectric function ௣
ଶ 
embedded in a medium of permittivity ௠
ଶ and interacting with light of wavelength ଴, the 
expressions for the scattering ௦௖௔ and extinction cross section ௘௫௧ are1 
௦௖௔ൌ
ଶగோమ
௫మ௟
௟
ଶ|ሽ∞
௟ୀଵ           (1) 
௘௫௧ൌ
ଶగோమ
௫మ௟ሿ∞
௟ୀଵ          (2) 
where ൌ
ఠ
௖௠ ൌ
ଶగ
ఒబ
௠ and c is the speed of light. The absorption cross section is obtained 
from the difference between the extinction and scattering cross sections: ௦௖௔. The 

===== PDF PAGE 5 =====

5 
 
coefficients ௟ and ௟ are computed from the Riccati-Bessel functions: 
௟ൌ
௠ట೗ሺ௠௫ሻట೗
′ ሺ௫ሻିట೗ሺ௫ሻట೗
′ ሺ௠௫ሻ
௠ట೗ሺ௠௫ሻక೗
′ ሺ௫ሻିక೗ሺ௫ሻట೗
′ ሺ௠௫ሻ     ( 3 )  
௟ൌ
ట೗ሺ௠௫ሻట೗
′ ሺ௫ሻି௠ట೗ሺ௫ሻట೗
′ ሺ௠௫ሻ
ట೗ሺ௠௫ሻక೗
′ሺ௫ሻି௠క೗ሺ௫ሻట೗
′ ሺ௠௫ሻ      ( 4 )  
where ሻ ൌ ቀ
గ௫
ଶቁ
భ
మ
௟ାభ
మ
ሻ and ሻൌቀ
గ௫
ଶቁ
భ
మ
௟ାభ
మ
௟ାభ
మ
ሻ൨. ௟ and ௟ are the first and 
second order Bessel functions, respectively. The primes in equations 3 and 4 indicate 
differentiation with respect to the argument in the parentheses, and ݉is the relative refractive 
index of the nanoparticle and the medium defined as ௠. 
 Fig. 1B shows the calculated absorption, scattering, and extinction efficiencies of gold 
nanoparticles with radii of 25 and 50 nm in vacuum (௠ ൌ1). The frequency dependent 
dielectric function of gold is taken from the tabulated values for bulk gold.27 The plasmon 
resonance of gold nanoparticles in this size range is peaked in the green region of the 
electromagnetic spectrum, giving rise to the brilliant red colors of colloidal gold solutions. 
Comparing the spectra for these two different nanoparticle sizes, the most noticeable effect is 
that the resonance redshifts to longer wavelengths and broadens as the size increases, due to 
retardation effects as the incident light can no longer homogeneously polarize the larger 
nanoparticle, leading to the excitation of higher order modes.1 Larger nanoparticles also scatter 
light more efficiently, causing additional linewidth broadening because of radiation damping.1  
Equations 1 and 2 are analytical solutions and the accuracy of Mie theory is only 
dependent on the number of multipolar modes ݈that are included in the calculation as long as the 
nanoparticle can be approximated as a sphere. For small spherical nanoparticles with radii much 
smaller than the wavelength of the incident light (R ~ 10 nm), the dipole approximation, which 
only includes the dipolar mode (ൌ1), can be applied and yields the following expressions:2 

===== PDF PAGE 6 =====

6 
 
௦௖௔ൌ
ଶସగయ௏మఢ೘మ	
ఒబర
ሺఢభିఢ೘ሻమାఢమమ
ሺఢభାଶఢ೘ሻమାఢమమ     ( 5 )  
௔௕௦ൌ
ଵ଼గ௏ఢ೘
య
మ
ఒబ
ఢమ
ሺఢభାଶఢ೘ሻమାఢమమ              (6) 
where ܸis the nanoparticle volume. The resonance condition is fulfilled when ௠ for 
small ଶ. Equations 5 and 6 show that absorption scales with ܸwhile scattering scales with ଶ. 
Consequently, for larger nanoparticles, extinction is dominated by scattering while for smaller 
nanoparticles absorption is stronger than scattering. It can also be readily inferred from the 
Lorentzian form of equations 5 and 6 that the real part of the dielectric function ଵ	determines the 
plasmon resonance position whereas the imaginary part ଶ governs the linewidth. 
Although the dipole approximation in the quasi-static limit predicts that, except for a 
volume dependent scaling factor, the plasmon resonance is size-independent, experiments find 
that the plasmon resonance is strongly damped for very small nanoparticles (R < 5 nm ).28 The 
increased damping for such small nanoparticles is due to the electron-surface scattering arising 
from the fact that the size of the nanoparticle is much smaller than the electron mean free path of 
gold. To account for this small-particle effect, one can add an additional size dependent term to 
the dielectric function, i.e. ሻ, and continue to use the equations 5 and 6.2 In addition, 
other factors such as quantum mechanical electron spill out and nonlocal effects contribute to the 
position and shape of the plasmon resonance for very small nanoparticles and can be accounted 
for by properly modifying the dielectric function.29 
 Mie theory, derived for solid spherical meta l nanoparticles, can also be applied to a 
sphere with multiple concentric layers composed of different materials, such as nanoshells, as 
spherical symmetry is preserved.1, 2 Mie theory can furthermore be extended to a system 
containing an arbitrary number of interacting spheres.1, 2 In this generalized Mie theory approach 

===== PDF PAGE 7 =====

7 
 
the scattered fields of each nanoparticle act as input fields of all other nanoparticles in addition to 
the incident light, giving a set of coupled equations that are solved analytically. Furthermore, 
within the dipole approximation the description of the optical properties of oblate and ellipsoidal 
nanoparticles has been derived. This analytical solution of Maxwell's equations is known as 
Gans theory and is particularly useful to describe the plasmon scattering and absorption of 
nanorods that are approximated as ellipsoids according to:2 
    ௦௖௔ൌ
଼గయ௏మ	
ଽఒర௠
ଶ ∑ ଵ
௉ೕ
మ
ሺఌభିఌ೘ሻమାఢమమ
ቆఢభା
ቀభషುೕቁച೘
ುೕ
ቇ
మ
ାఢమమ
ଷ
௝ୀଵ           (7) 
௔௕௦ൌ
ଶగ௏	
ଷఒ௠
య
మ ∑
ቆభ
ುೕ
మቇఢమ
ቆఢభା
ቀభషುೕቁച೘
ುೕ
ቇ
మ
ାఢమమ
ଷ
௝ୀଵ         (8) 
where ௝ are the depolarization factors along the main A and two minor axes B and C of the 
ellipsoid and are given by: 
஺ ൌቀ
ଵି௘మ
௘మ ቁቄ
ଵ
ଶ௘ln ቀ
ଵା௘
ଵି௘
ቁെ1 ቅ    ( 9 )  
஼ൌ
ଵି௉ಲ
ଶ      ( 1 0 )  
where AR is the aspect ratio of the ellipsoid and the eccentricity e is defined by ൌ
ට൬1െቀ
ଵ
஺ோቁ൰. 
The optical response of a nanorod shows two nondegenerate plasmon resonances, the 
longitudinal and the transverse modes. The longitudinal mode, which is much stronger and lower 
in energy, corresponds to the electron oscillation along the long axis of the nanorod, while the 
higher energy transverse mode is polarized in the perpendicular direction. Fig. 1C illustrates the 
extinction (red), scattering (blue) and absorption (black) spectra of gold nanorods with varying 
aspect ratios calculated using Gans theory. As the aspect ratio increases, the longitudinal mode is 

===== PDF PAGE 8 =====

8 
 
shifted to longer wavelengths. In addition to a strong dependence on the aspect ratio, the 
longitudinal mode is also highly sensitive to ௠, making plasmonic nanorods good substrates for 
localized surface plasmon resonance sensing.  
Analytical methods such as Mie and Gans theory are only applicable to highly symmetric 
nanoparticles shapes. However, grid-base approaches like the discrete dipole approximation 
(DDA), finite difference time domain (FDTD), and finite element methods (FEM) are capable of 
simulating the plasmonic response of any arbitrary nanoparticle shape by dividing the 
nanoparticle of interest into smaller interacting domains and solving Maxwell's equations 
numerically in either the time or frequency domain.30 As these methods also use tabulated metal 
dielectric functions that are, depending on the system, appropriately modified, the fundamental 
principles of the interaction between plasmonic nanoparticles and light are well captured by Mie 
and Gans theory and we therefore forgo a more detailed discussion of numerical simulations. We 
note though that in practice with the availability of improved computing resources DDA, FDTD, 
and FEM have become the standard methods. 
 
3. Single Particle Scattering Methods 
 Key factors for achieving sp ectroscopy of individual nanoparticles is to prepare samples 
of isolated nanoparticles and to detect a single nanoparticle with sufficient signal compared to 
the background. Because the background material is typically present in excess compared to the 
single nanoparticle (solvent molecules, polymer matrix, or even just the substrate on which the 
nanoparticles have been deposited), it is desirable to work with an optical signal that is 
background free. Molecular fluorescence satisfies this requirement as the excitation light at 
shorter wavelengths than the fluorescence can be selectively blocked with appropriate filters 

===== PDF PAGE 9 =====

9 
 
employing a background medium that is sufficiently nonfluorescent. Emission from plasmonic 
nanoparticles is, however, very weak and has only been recently reported to be a reasonable 
optical signal for single particle spectroscopy.31 
 Although scattering is not a b ackground-free technique, it can be implemented in a dark-
field microscope in such a way that only scattering from plasmonic nanoparticles with no 
contribution from absorption is observed. 8-14 In fact, the reduced background signal in dark-field 
microscopy and the ease of its implementation makes this technique the standard for single 
particle spectroscopy of plasmonic nanostructures. Dark-field microscopy requires excitation at a 
large incident angle using a high numerical aperture (NA) lens, while the scattered light is 
collected at smaller angles with a lens that has a sufficiently low NA to ensure that no excitation 
light reflected by the substrate reaches the detector. The lower NA lens only collects light that 
has been scattered in all directions by objects in the field of view, thus creating dark-field images 
with very little background signal. Both transmitted and reflected light geometries have been 
realized, and alternatively excitation can also be carried out under total internal reflection 
conditions using a prism.32  
 Fig. 2A shows a real-color scattering image of single silver nanoparticles and their 
respective spectra.11 Fig. 2B gives an example dark-field scattering image of single gold 
nanorods that appear as red dots because of their redshifted longitudinal surface plasmon mode 
compared to spherical gold nanoparticles that scatter green light.13 The single plasmonic 
nanoparticles are identified by the isolated colored dots that have dimensions determined by the 
diffraction limit. The nanoparticles appear as different colors in the dark-field images based on 
their plasmon resonance wavelengths, therefore directly reflecting differences in their size and 
shape. To further quantify the color corresponding to individual plasmonic nanoparticles, the 

===== PDF PAGE 10 =====

10 
 
scattered light can be spectrally resolved and recorded using a spectrograph equipped with a 
charge coupled device (CCD) camera. Often the same CCD camera is used for first imaging a 
region of interest by switching from the grating to a mirror in the spectrograph or using the zero 
order reflection of the grating. A particular nanoparticle is then isolated by closing the 
spectrograph’s entrance slit and centering the nanoparticle on the slit by moving either the 
sample or the spectrograph. Binning the CCD camera pixels in the vertical direction ensures the 
collection of single particle spectra in case several vertically displaced nanoparticles are aligned 
with the entrance slit. 
 Alternatively, imaging can also be achieved with a highly sensitive single element 
detector such as an avalanche photodiode (APD) by placing a pinhole in the first image plane of 
the microscope and reimaging the scattered light onto the APD.23 Images are obtained by raster 
scanning the sample with a piezo-electric stage, and the resolution is determined by the size of 
the pinhole. Spectra are again acquired with a spectrograph and CCD camera, but using the 
pinhole instead of the spectrograph's entrance slit ensures that only light from a single 
nanoparticles is collected. This approach has the advantage of being able to investigate smaller 
regions of interest and further isolating the scattering signal of the desired nanoparticle from 
other large scattering centers that are often unwanted impurities caused by nanoparticle 
aggregation.  
Although background scattering is minimized in a dark-field excitation geometry, the 
measured spectra still must be corrected for the weak scattering by the substrate and adjusted 
with a white light spectrum to account for uneven lamp illumination across all wavelengths.
10 
The corrected spectrum intensity I is then obtained according to: 
ൌ
ூೄିூಳಸ
ூೄ೅ವିூವ಴
        (11) 

===== PDF PAGE 11 =====

11 
 
where ௌ is the spectrum of the nanoparticle, IBG is the background spectrum, ௌ்஽ is the spectrum 
of a white light standard, and ஽஼ represents the detector dark counts measured with the lamp 
switched off. After this correction, spectra of nanoparticles with relatively simple shapes appear 
as Lorentzian peaks with different resonance energies and widths based on nanoparticle size and 
shape. The linewidth of these spectra is significantly reduced compared to the ensemble spectra. 
 In addition to eliminating ensemble av eraging of many plasmon resonance spectra, 
polarization resolved single particle spectroscopy furthermore has the advantage that the 
orientation of plasmonic nanoparticles with anisotropic shapes can be probed for either 
immobilized or diffusing nanoparticles as plasmon modes are often polarized along specific axes 
of the nanoparticles.25 For example, light scattered by the longitudinal plasmon resonance of a 
gold nanorod is polarized along the long axis, and therefore the signal intensity is dependent on 
nanorod orientation. To investigate the scattered light polarization, a polarizer is placed either in 
the detection or excitation path, and its angle is systematically changed, giving rise to the typical 
dipole emitter ଶ variation of the scattered light intensity with a phase determined by the 
dipole orientation.9, 13, 25 For excitation polarization experiments, a wedge is typically added to 
ensure that the incident light comes from only one direction rather than illuminating from all 
angles. Instead of a series of measurements varying the polarizer angle, the polarized scattered 
light can also be split into orthogonal components with a birefringent crystal placed after the 
objective and imaged with a CCD camera simultaneously.12 With the knowledge of the relative 
intensities of the two orthogonal polarizations, time-resolved detection becomes possible in order 
to, for example, monitor the rotational motion of single gold nanorods, which are loosely bound 
to a glass substrate with an interaction strength determined by the ionic strength and pH of the 
surrounding solution, as illustrated in Fig. 3. 

===== PDF PAGE 12 =====

12 
 
 As this overview shows, nanoparticle scatteri ng is a powerful optical signal to identify 
single plasmonic nanoparticles. The fact that the scattering signal is nonbleaching, nonblinking, 
and tunable with nanoparticle geometry coupled with the ease of dark-field microscopy makes 
plasmonic nanoparticles ideal colored scattering labels. However, because the scattering cross 
section is proportional to the volume squared, scattering based techniques, like dark-field 
microscopy, cannot detect nanoparticles smaller than 20 nm. For 20 nm gold nanoparticles 
excited close to the plasmon resonance maximum at a wavelength of 532 nm, the ratio of the 
scattering to the absorption cross section is ~ 7×10-3. As a result, other methods are necessary to 
probe small nanoparticles, as will be discussed in the next two sections. 
 
4. Single Particle Extinction Methods 
 Single molecule extinction measurements analogous to ensemble dual channel UV-vis 
spectrometers are difficult to perform directly on single molecules in a standard transmission 
geometry because of the large background of the incident light and the small signal due to the 
low concentration of just one molecule. Plasmonic nanoparticles can be large enough that single 
particle extinction measurements that record the sum of scattering and absorption are possible. 
Extinction is defined as: 
ൌ 	 െlog	ሺ
ூିூ೏೎
ூబିூ೏೎
ሻ     ( 1 2 )  
where I is the transmitted light intensity for a nanoparticle in the observation volume, I0 is the 
intensity without a nanoparticle, and Idc are the dark counts, which are measured with the lamp 
switched off.  
Broadband extinction spectroscopy covering the visible and IR spectral ranges has been 
achieved with a combination of a Si CCD camera and an InGaAs array detector that together 

===== PDF PAGE 13 =====

13 
 
cover a spectral window of 500 ~ 2000 nm.23 Fig. 4A shows a scheme of such a broadband 
single particle spectrometer. A halogen lamp provides normal incidence light to the sample 
containing isolated nanoparticles, and the extinction signal is collected by an objective, passed 
through a pinhole, and detected sequentially by first one and then the other spectrometer/detector 
positioned at two different microscope exit ports. A pinhole and fiber are used to collect only the 
signal from the region of interest. This approach works best for larger nanoparticle sizes or 
nanoparticle assemblies. Fig. 4A shows the extinction spectrum of a gold nanorod with an aspect 
ratio of 3.1 and a diameter of 120 nm. The longitudinal plasmon mode of this nanorod is 
redshifted by 600 nm compared to typically 10-25 nm wide gold nanorods of the same aspect 
ratio. The drastic redshift is a result of retardation effects as such large nanorods fall outside the 
quasi-static size range. Gans theory therefore fails to describe the spectrum in Fig. 4A, but 
retardation is fully accounted for using grid-based simulations.
23  
For smaller nanoparticles, however, extinction spectroscopy as just described fails unless 
modifications are made to enhance the sensitivity. One possibility is to employ interferometric 
detection, which has made it possible to collect extinction spectra of 5 nm gold nanoparticles.22 
Fig. 4B illustrates the experimental realization of this technique. Essentially, a nanoparticle 
sample is covered with refractive index-matching oil to control incident light scattering by the 
interface and illuminated by a supercontinuum laser source using an objective with a high NA. 
The reflected signal is collected by the objective, passed through a pinhole, and detected by a 
spectrometer equipped with a CCD camera. The measured intensity Im originates from the 
scattered field by the single nanoparticle ௜௡௖ and a reflected field of the incident beam 
௜௡௖ given by ௥௘௙ห
ଶ
, where ௜௡௖ is the field of the laser beam, r is the 
reflectivity of the glass-oil interface. ሻwhere ሻ	is the wavelength-dependent 

===== PDF PAGE 14 =====

14 
 
polarizability of the nanoparticle and ஽ is a proportionality factor describing the detection 
efficiency of the optical setup. The extinction spectrum is then calculated by the intensity 
difference between the signal ௠ for a single nanoparticle and the reference intensity ௥௘௙ൌ
௥௘௙ห
ଶ
, measured away from the nanoparticle, and normalized by the reference intensity 
according to: 
ሻൌ
ூ೘ሺఒሻିூೝ೐೑ሺఒሻ
ூೝ೐೑ሺఒሻ ൌ
ఎವ
మ
௥మሻ|ଶെ2
ఎವ
௥ሻ         (13) 
The first term in equation 13 corresponds to pure scattering, while the second term is due to 
absorption. Fig. 4B shows extinction spectra of gold nanoparticles with varying diameters from 
60 nm (top) to 5 nm (bottom). As can be inferred from the change of sign from positive to 
negative, the spectrum of the 60 nm nanoparticle is dominated by mostly scattering while the 
spectrum of the 5 nm gold nanoparticle is caused by pure absorption, consistent with the size 
scaling of plasmon absorption and scattering. 
 A related interferometric detection scheme th at can be easily implemented in a standard 
microscope and has been used to study single plasmonic nanoparticles is differential interference 
contrast (DIC) microscopy.
24 In a DIC microscope, the incident light is split into two 
orthogonally polarized components (ො,ො) that are laterally displaced by ~ 100 nm from each 
other. When a sample is illuminated, two shifted intermediate images are formed and then are 
recombined after the objective by a Wollaston prism to generate an interference pattern. 
Constructive (bright) and destructive (dark) interferences are formed with polarized illumination 
along ො and ො, respectively, due to the phase difference that originates from the different 
refractive indices of the nanoparticle and its surrounding environment. For isotropic 
nanoparticles, evenly distributed bright and dark intensities are observed because of the identical 
refractive index of the nanoparticle along ො and ො. In contrast, for anisotropic nanoparticles such 

===== PDF PAGE 15 =====

15 
 
as nanorods, the wavelength-dependent anisotropic refractive index due to the transverse and 
longitudinal surface plasmons leads to different bright and dark intensities depending on the 
orientation of the nanorods relative to ො and ො. For wavelengths resonant with the longitudinal 
plasmon mode and a nanorod that is aligned with its long axis parallel to ො, the DIC image has 
the highest bright intensity and the lowest dark intensity, resulting in a bright spot in the DIC 
image. Likewise, when the long axis of a nanorod is orientated parallel to ො, a dark spot is 
observed. Similarly, for excitation of the transverse plasmon mode, dark and bright spots appear 
when the short nanorod axis is aligned with ො and ො, respectively. The bright and dark intensities 
in the DIC image of plasmonic nanorods follow a ସ and ସ relationship with respect to the 
angle between the major nanorod axes and ො or ො. This behavior is illustrated in Fig. 4C,24 which 
shows DIC images for two single gold nanorods as a function of orientation, which was varied 
by rotating the sample. As the nanorods are rotated, the bright and dark intensities at 720 and 540 
nm, corresponding to the longitudinal and transverse plasmon resonances, respectively, change 
according to ସ and ସ, where the 90° shift between the periodic patterns of the transverse 
and the longitudinal plasmon resonances is consistent with the orthogonal nature of these two 
modes. 
An alternative method for measuring the extinction spectra of small single plasmonic 
nanoparticles is spatial modulation spectroscopy.20, 21 As illustrated in Fig. 5A, a laser is focused 
by an objective on a nanoparticle at position (x,y). The transmitted light is collected by another 
objective and detected by a photodiode, which is connected to a lock-in amplifier. The position 
of the nanoparticle is then modulated along the y direction with a frequency f using a piezo-
electric scanning stage. The displacement ݕߜis kept smaller than the size of the incident laser 
beam. The transmitted power Pt compared to the incident power Pi is given by: 

===== PDF PAGE 16 =====

16 
 
          ሻሻ 
ீ
′ሻ െ
ఙ೐ೣ೟
ଶீ
′′ሻ   (14) 
 As equation 14 demonstrates, the normalized transmittance change 
∆்
் ൌ
௉೟ି௉೔
௉೔
 is 
composed of the first ᇱ and second ᇱᇱ derivative of the Gaussian beam profile ሻ, which 
can be extracted by the lock-in amplifier at modulation frequencies of ݂ and ݂A strength of 
spatial modulation spectroscopy is that with the measured signal amplitude and known 
displacement the extinction cross section of single plasmonic nanoparticles can be obtained. For 
10 nm gold nanoparticles a value of σext = 53 ± 2 nm2 is measured at a wavelength of 532 nm.20 
Furthermore, polarization dependent extinction spectra can be obtained by polarizing the light 
from a wavelength tunable excitation source.21 Fig. 5B shows the extinction spectra of a single 
silica shell coated silver nanoparticle (Ag@SiO2) excited with two orthogonal linear 
polarizations. A slight ellipsoidal shape of the nanoparticle gives rise to the difference in the two 
polarized spectra as confirmed by simulations. The inset of Fig. 5B furthermore illustrate the 
effect of sample inhomogeneity as the spectrum of a single Ag@SiO
2 nanoparticle spectrum is 
much narrower compared to the ensemble extinction spectrum. 
 
4. Single Particle Absorption Methods 
As the absorption cross section of a nanoparticle scales linearly with volume, while the 
scattering scales with volume squared, extinction is essentially equal to absorption for very small 
plasmonic nanoparticles. The extinction experiments discussed in the last section basically 
measure absorption only for nanoparticles with diameters smaller than 20 nm. However, as the 
size increases scattering also contributes to extinction. Only plasmon absorption without 
scattering contributions for nanoparticles of arbitrary size can be obtained using photothermal 

===== PDF PAGE 17 =====

17 
 
imaging techniques that take advantage of the strong heating of the nanoparticles and their 
environment following plasmon absorption.15-19 
Plasmon absorption creates a hot electron gas, which cools via electron-phonon coupling 
to create an elevated lattice temperature of a nanoparticle. The hot nanoparticle relaxes further 
nonradiatively by coupling to vibrations of the surrounding medium, transferring the initially 
absorbed excitation energy into heat within hundreds of picoseconds.33 This temperature change 
can be detected by optical methods, which, when combined with intensity modulation of the 
heating beam and lock-in detection, represent some of the most sensitive detection schemes.33 
The strength of the photothermal signal depends on the amount of energy absorbed by the 
nanoparticle and then dissipated as heat into the medium. The dissipated power Pdiss results in a 
temperature change ሻ as a function of distance r from the nanoparticle given by:18  
ሻൌ
௉೏೔ೞೞ
ସగ఑௥ቀെ
௥
௥೟೓
െ
௥
௥೟೓
ቁቃ           (15) 
where  is the thermal conductivity of medium, ௧௛ൌට
ଶ఑
Ω஼೛
 is the characteristic length of heat 
diffusion, ௣ is the heat capacity of the medium, and  is the modulation frequency if the 
heating beam intensity is varied in time t. The dissipated power is given by ௗ௜௦௦ൌ
ఙೌ್ೞ௉೓೐ೌ೟
஺ , 
where ௔௕௦ is the absorption cross section of the nanoparticle, Pheat is the power of the incident 
heating beam, and ܣis the illumination area.  
 As the refractive index of the medium nm changes with temperature according to 
డ௡೘
డ், the 
spatiotemporal profile of the change in the refractive index, ሻ ൈ
డ௡೘
డ், gives 
rise to a thermal lens, which can be probed with another laser beam.15, 18 As this probe beam only 
measures the refractive index changes of the medium, any wavelength can be selected for it and, 
in general, a nonresonant probe wavelength is chosen to avoid additional heating of the 

===== PDF PAGE 18 =====

18 
 
nanoparticle by the probe beam. 
This concept of taking advantage of a thermal lens created by light absorption is cleverly 
implemented in photothermal imaging, which has pushed the detection limit to metal clusters 
that are so small that no plasmon exists and heating occurs through the excitation of discrete 
electronic transitions.
15 In photothermal imaging the heating beam is modulated with a 
modulation frequency of  = 100 kHz – 15 MHz, and the time-varying thermal lens created 
around the nanoparticles due to plasmon absorption is detected via interaction with a probe beam 
that produces a scattered field ௦௖௔ with a frequency shift of . The part of the probe beam field 
Eprob that is not scattered by the thermal lens interferes with ௦௖௔ to generate a beat note with a 
frequency of , which can be easily extracted using a lock-in amplifier. As illustrated in Fig. 6A, 
a modulated 532 nm heating beam and a 720 nm probe beam are overlapped and focused on the 
sample by an objective. The linearly polarized probe beam passes through a polarization beam 
splitter followed by a quarter-wave plate, and is focused on the sample by an objective. The 
reflected signal is collected by the same objective, passes through the same optics in reverse 
order, and is thereby redirected to a fast photodiode diode. Photothermal imaging has 
successfully been applied to the measurement of gold nanoparticles with a size of 1.4 nm 
composed of only 67 atoms. Fig. 6A shows three-dimensional photothermal images of 1.4 nm 
gold nanoparticles with a signal to noise ratio exceeding 10.  
It is important to understand that the photothermal signal is proportional to the 
nanoparticle absorption cross section, which is the main quantity of interest, but originates from 
the change of medium refractive index with temperature. Understanding these relationships 
allows one to optimize the photothermal signal.18 The intensity at the detector is proportional to 
௣௥௢௕௘ห
ଶ
 and the amplitude extracted by the lock-in amplifier is proportional to 

===== PDF PAGE 19 =====

19 
 
௣௥௢௕௘ห.15 The photothermal signal can be modeled assuming scattering from a 
fluctuating dielectric medium to obtain the scattered field due to ሻ. Using this approach, 
the following equation is derived for the signal to noise ratio (SNR) in the case of shot-noise 
limited detection:18 
∝
ଵ
గఠబ
௠
డ௡೘
డ்
ଵ
஼೛ఒమΩ
ఙೌ್ೞ
஺௣௥௢௕௘Δݐ16) 
where ଴, ߣ and ௣௥௢௕௘ are the beam width, wavelength, and power of the probe beam, 
respectively. t is the integration time of the lock-in amplifier. 
According to equation 16, there are several ways in which the photothermal signal can be 
enhanced.18 To obtain the highest SNR, the heating and probe beam powers should be 
maximized while avoiding melting the nanoparticles (Fig. 6B, top). The modulation frequency of 
the heating beam can be tuned to ensure that rth is similar to the size of 0. Most importantly, a 
high thermal sensitivity of the refractive index of the surrounding medium is critical to obtain the 
highest SNR. To quantify the thermal properties of the medium and experimentally test its 
predicted influence on the photothermal signal, the concept of a medium photothermal strength Σ 
is introduced by calculating݊
డ௡೘
డ்
ଵ
஼௣, which only depends on parameters of the surrounding 
matrix. For 20 nm gold nanoparticles surrounded by different organic solvents as well as water, 
photothermal imaging experiments indeed confirmed the linear relationship between Σ and the 
SNR, as shown in Fig. 6B (middle panel). Thermal isolation of the glass substrate with a 
polymer layer further increases the photothermal signal (Fig. 6B, bottom). Thermotropic liquid 
crystals have even large variations of the refractive index with temperature 
డ௡೘
డ், especially near 
the nematic-isotropic transition temperature and can be used to further enhance the SNR.17. 
Similarly to polarized scattering and extinction spectroscopy of single nanoparticles, 

===== PDF PAGE 20 =====

20 
 
photothermal imaging can also be adapted to probe the longitudinal and transverse plasmon 
modes and hence be used to obtain the orientation of nanorods or other anisotropic plasmonic 
nanostructures.16 When altering the polarization of the heating beam, the photothermal intensity 
varies as the signal is maximized when the excitation light polarization is parallel to a particular 
plasmon mode, leading to most efficient absorption. Fig. 7A shows a correlated scanning 
electron microscopy (SEM) and a photothermal image of two individual gold nanorods and a 
nanorod dimer. Changing the polarization of the 675 nm heating beam causes a ଶ variation in 
the photothermal signal (Fig. 7B). The phase difference, from which the orientation of the two 
gold nanorods is obtained, is 80° for the two nanorods, consistent with their almost orthogonal 
relative orientation. Because of the high sensitivity of photothermal imaging the orientation of 
single gold nanorods can be determined by both the transverse and longitudinal modes. In 
contrast, scattering is often not sensitive enough to detect the much weaker transverse plasmon 
mode because of the size scaling of scattering compared to absorption. The correlated SEM and 
optical images in Fig. 7A furthermore illustrate that it is often not possible to tell from the optical 
image alone if only a single nanoparticle is present. We will discuss this issue and how it can be 
addressed in the next section. 
 
6. Correlated Single Particle Spectroscopy and Electron Microscopy 
 As for any single molecule spectroscopy tech nique, sample preparation is critical to 
guarantee the presence of individual nanoparticles within a diffraction limited area. A low 
nanoparticle density, about 20 nanoparticles per 100 μm2, is essential to facilitate single particle 
spectroscopy. Typically, colloidal nanoparticles are deposited directly onto a substrate through 
either spin-coating or drop-casting a dilute nanoparticle solution.10, 34 The nanoparticles can also 

===== PDF PAGE 21 =====

21 
 
be mixed with a polymer solution before deposition by spin-casting, creating a thin polymer film 
with nanoparticles embedded in it.15 The polymer film immobilizes the nanoparticles and is 
typically smoother than the underlying substrate and reduces unwanted background scattering. 
However, even though an image contains isolated dots, it is not valid to assume that each dot 
must correspond to a single nanoparticle as small nanoparticle aggregates are still smaller than 
the diffraction limit and therefore also appear as a single dot of the same size (Fig. 7A). 
Excluding dots with much larger than average intensities is possible, but selection based on 
intensity alone is not possible when trying to identify single nanoparticles. Judging by the 
lineshape and only selecting spectra that can be fitted with a Lorenztian curve is another possible 
criterion,8, 35 but not necessarily all exclusive. The reason why image intensity and spectral 
lineshape are not sufficient is that plasmon coupling among nanoparticle aggregates is rather 
complex and not simply additive in any way.26 
 The solution to this problem is to perf orm correlated optical spectroscopy and electron 
microscopy (SEM or transmission electron microscopy (TEM)).25 This approach ensures that 
only single nanoparticles are measured and furthermore allows one to gain a detailed 
understanding of how the physical parameters of individual nanoparticles affect their spectral 
characteristics. In particular, the structure of a specific nanoparticle as obtained from high 
resolution electron microscopy can be used as the input for electromagnetic simulations using 
DDA, FDTD, and FEM methods to quantitatively interpret the experimental single particle 
data.30 However, in addition to individual nanoparticles, coupled plasmonic nanoparticles have 
become equally important as near-field interactions make it possible to engineer desired 
plasmonic lineshapes with novel resonances that are not supported by the constituent 
nanoparticles.26 Single particle spectroscopy methods, especially when correlated with electron 

===== PDF PAGE 22 =====

22 
 
microscopy, have been essential to understand the nature of coupled plasmon modes because, in 
addition to size and shape, interparticle distance and relative orientation also matter to the optical 
spectrum. A discussion of plasmon coupling is, however, outside the scope of this tutorial review 
and the reader is referred to other review articles on this topic.26 
 SEM or TEM images must unambiguously corr elate with the optical image of a single 
nanoparticle. To accomplish such correlation, a careful choice of the sample’s substrate, the 
sample preparation, and a marker are required.36 The marker is necessary so that the region of 
interest can be readily identified in both microscopes at varying magnifications. Most simply, 
fortuitous dust particles or scratches on the surface of the substrate can be used to correlate 
between electron and optical images. However, such random objects are not guaranteed to be 
near enough to the nanoparticles of interest for clear identification of the same region, nor are 
they guaranteed to be far enough away from the nanoparticles so as to avoid contamination by 
scattering from the marker itself. Therefore, more elaborate markers are generally used10, 34, 37 
and we next present a few examples.  
 TEM grids with a finder pattern but without a support film can be used as a mask to 
prepare an indexed grid on a substrate for correlation with in SEM, as shown in Fig. 8A.10 An 
indexed copper grid is secured on a clean substrate either before or after deposition of 
nanoparticles, and then gold or another metal is evaporated onto the substrate. Lifting off the 
mask reveals an indexed pattern that can be seen in the SEM and is also clearly visible in the 
optical microscope, because the edges of the evaporated grid scatter more strongly than the 
background. The nanoparticles that are on the substrate where there is no gold can be easily 
identified in both microscopes, because the evaporated grid provides a basis for orientation. 
Large area SEM scans and optical images can then be overlaid, identifying same regions with 

===== PDF PAGE 23 =====

23 
 
great accuracy. 
 Focused ion beam (FIB) milling can be used to  directly write patterns into the surface of 
a transparent glass substrate coated with a thin conductive layer, such as indium tin oxide (ITO), 
important for SEM imaging in standard instruments.34 Fig. 8B shows an example pattern created 
with an FIB consisting of a 50 x 50 um2 box with an orientational marker in one corner. In this 
case, a thin layer of poly(methyl methacralate) (PMMA) is first spin coated over a clean ITO 
coated slide and the nanoparticles are spin coated on top of the PMMA layer, followed by FIB 
milling. 
 Electron beam and photo lithography are other popular methods for preparing markers on 
a transparent substrate such that the pattern is clearly visible in both electron and optical 
microscopes,
36 but similar lithography has also been performed on a TEM substrate37. The 
substrate is a Si3N4 thin film window supported on a silicon wafer. The substrates are coated 
with a thin layer of SiO2 to make the substrate hydrophilic, and then the electron resist is spin 
coated on the substrate, followed by the evaporation of a thin layer of chromium. Standard 
electron-beam patterning is performed, followed by development, evaporation of chromium, and 
liftoff of the resist and excess metal. The results of this procedure are clearly identifiable linear 
marker bars visible both in TEM and optical microscopes. Then nanoparticles are deposited and 
unambiguous correlation between TEM and optical microscopy can be performed, as shown in 
Fig. 8E. Lithographically prepared metallic marker bars can exhibit strong scattering at their 
edges, and therefore they must be spaced sufficiently apart to avoid contaminating the single 
particle signal. 
 Alternatively, finder TEM grids with a typica l formvar or carbon coating can be used in 
both optical microscopes and TEM, with proper treatment of the grid to reduce background 

===== PDF PAGE 24 =====

24 
 
(Figs. 9A and 9B).38 After standard TEM sample preparation, TEM images may be taken prior to 
optical measurements, and then the TEM grid can be directly attached to a glass slide for 
support. A drop of refractive index matching oil between the grid and the slide helps to reduce 
the background during optical spectroscopy. On the other hand, if the nanoparticles are 
sufficiently immobilized on the TEM grid, e.g. using a gelatin or polymer solution, then the grid 
can be sandwiched between two glass slides with refractive index matching glycerin. TEM can 
then be performed after cleaning the sample with methanol for 10 to 20 seconds without fear of 
dislodging the nanoparticles. 
 Because the correlation between  electron and optical microscopy is meant to establish 
detailed relationships between spectral and physical characteristics of single plasmonic 
nanoparticles, the order of experiments is extremely important to avoid damaging the sample by 
a high intensity electron beam, as illustrated in Figs. 9C and 9D for hollow Ag-Au 
nanoparticles.
38 When these nanoparticles are viewed in a TEM with a 80 keV electron beam at 
about 200 pA/cm2 prior to optical characterization, the nanoparticles appear dimmer and have 
redshifted resonance energies and broadened linewidths when compared to nanoparticles that 
have not already been imaged by TEM. Several mechanisms for these spectral changes, which 
have been seen in both TEM and SEM, are possible, including structural changes to the 
nanoparticle due to the high intensity electron beam, electron-stimulated reactions between the 
nanoparticles and their substrates, and deposition of contaminants during imaging.38  In light of 
this information, it is important to perform optical measurements of nanostructures first, 
whenever possible. If electron microscopy must be performed first, a strategy including low 
electron beam current, low magnification, and short periods of exposure should be preferred, 
with higher quality images following the optical characterization. 

===== PDF PAGE 25 =====

25 
 
 
7. Super-Resolution Fluorescence Imaging 
Although markers allow for the identification of the same nanoparticle in an optical and 
electron microscope, as discussed in the last section, this process is rather tedious. Ideally, it 
would be possible to achieve sub-diffraction limited resolution in an optical microscope and to 
then also perform spectroscopy on the imaged plasmonic nanostructure. Super-resolution 
fluorescence imaging,39 which has been mainly developed for imaging biological samples, might 
be able to address this issue. The application of super-resolution fluorescence imaging to 
plasmonic nanostructures is still in its infancy and, unlike in biological samples, the perturbation 
of the fluorescent dye molecules by the plasmonic substrate needs to be carefully accounted 
for.40, 41 Nevertheless, we have chosen to briefly discuss next a few examples that illustrate how 
promising this approach could become in possibly routinely measuring nanostructures smaller 
than the diffraction limit of light. 
The point spread function (PSF) defines the spread of a point light source and is typically 
described by its width and the position of its center. The localization uncertainty refers to the 
precision with which a PSF can be localized in space, while spatial resolution refers to how well 
two PSFs separated by a certain distance can be distinguished. When two emitting dipoles are 
nearby one another, instead of observing their exact shape and location, only a single spot with a 
diameter of about half the wavelength of the light used to image the emitters is observed. This 
fact is due to the light diffraction limit, which prevents the resolution of nanoscale features using 
far-field optics. The minimum separation distance that can be resolved with far-field optics 
within the diffraction limit of light is related to the width of the PSF and can be defined using the 
following equation:39 

===== PDF PAGE 26 =====

26 
 
௦௘௣ൌ0 . 6 1
ఒ
ே஺     ( 1 7 )  
where ܣܰis the numerical aperture of the objective and λ is the wavelength of light. However, 
by employing super-resolution imaging strategies, the limitation imposed by equation 17 can be 
overcome. The basic concept of one type of super-resolution imaging techniques is to use super-
localization of individual emitters via fitting of the emission pattern to a PSF, while also ensuring 
that only a subset of emitters is on at the same time, and in particular, that there will almost never 
be two emitters separated by less than dsep, determined by the density of the emitters.39 The 
density of the emitters can be controlled via their concentration, and more importantly, by 
forcing a sub-population of them into non-emissive states.  Another approach to super-resolution 
imaging is to directly modify the PSF by, for example, using two different laser beams that 
excite and deactivate the fluorophores in a spatially dependent manner, thus creating an effective 
excitation area smaller than the diffraction limit. By spatially scanning the excitation source or 
the nanostructure of interest, a super-resolved image is then obtained.  In this review, we will 
discuss only the first of these two super-resolution techniques, which is based on the stochastic 
nature of molecular fluorescence.   
Super-localization of individual emitters is achieved by fitting the experimentally-
measured PSFs, typically acquired in a wide-field collection scheme using a CCD camera, with a 
model PSF, such as a 2-D Gaussian function:40 
଴exp ൥െ
ଵ
ଶቈቀ
௫ି௫బ
௦ೣ
ቁ
ଶ
൅൬
௬ି௬బ
௦೤
൰
ଶ
቉൩    (18) 
where ሻ is the spatial intensity profile of the diffraction-limited spot, ଴ is the background 
intensity, ଴ is the peak intensity, ଴ and ଴ are the centroid coordinates, and ௫ and ௬ are the 
width of the Gaussian peak. Although in certain cases more complex model PSFs should be 

===== PDF PAGE 27 =====

27 
 
used, the 2-D Gaussian function fitting is fast and a very good approximation to most intensity 
patterns of subwavelength emitters. PSF fitting enables localization in terms of the ଴ and ଴ 
centroid coordinates with a precision down to a few nanometers, depending mostly on the 
number of collected photons.39 
 Apart from sub-diffraction localization of single emitters, the key to super-resolution 
imaging techniques is to control the number of active emitters per time.
39  It is beyond the scope 
of this review to mention the many different strategies that have been developed, but instead we 
focus here on two techniques that have been applied to image plasmonic nanostructures: 
photoactivated localization microscopy (PALM)41 and ground state depletion microscopy 
(GSDIM).40 In GSDIM, active control of the emission state is achieved by first depleting the 
ground state of single fluorophores using intense laser illumination, which achieves a high 
population of emitters in the dark triplet state. Stochastic relaxation back to the ground state turns 
a subset of emitters on at a time. PALM, on the other hand, uses a second laser to 
photophysically switch on the emission state of the single fluorophores. The purpose of 
controlling the fluorophores in both techniques is to keep the density of activated emitters low 
enough that the PSFs of individual fluorophores do not overlap and their centroid position can be 
accurately determined. By collecting many consecutive images, in which a different subset of 
emitters are active, the overall spatial distribution of the fluorescent labels can be mapped and 
reconstructed into a super-resolution image. 
 GSDIM has been successfully adopted to image single gold nanowires (Figs. 10A-
10H).
40 The nanowires are labeled with fluorophores linked to the nanowire surface with 
thiolated DNA molecules. The dark-field scattering image (Fig. 10A) and fluorescence image 
(Fig. 10B) fail to reveal the underlying features of the nanowire as well as the locations of the 

===== PDF PAGE 28 =====

28 
 
fluorophores. The relative frequency histogram (Fig. 10C) and spatial intensity map (Fig. 10D) 
of the reconstructed nanowire, however, show the true dimensions of the nanowire, as confirmed 
by comparing the spatial intensity map to the SEM image (Fig. 10E-10G). On the other hand, 
comparison to the fluorescence image (Fig. 10H) clearly demonstrates that the true dimensions 
of the nanowire are hidden in the far-field image. PALM has been applied to image silver 
nanowires and gold nanotriangles that are labeled with the photoactivatable protein Dronpa.41 
Fig. 10I shows an atomic force microscopy (AFM) image of an array of gold nanotriangles. The 
same area is imaged using PALM as illustrated by the reconstructed frequency histogram (Fig. 
10J) and spatial intensity map (Fig. 10K) of detected fluorophores. The high resolution density 
maps (Figs. 10L -10N) are able to resolve the nanotriangles. 
 In both studies, it has been pointed out that the role of the imaged nanostructures is not 
passive, but the plasmonic nanostructures act as antennas that modify the emission of the 
fluorophores through enhancement of the fluorescence intensity and the direction of the emitted 
light. For nanowire waveguides, the emission site can furthermore be altered via coupling 
between emitters and propagating surface plasmons. Nevertheless, GSDIM and PALM are 
capable of resolving the dimensions of plasmonic nanostructures that are smaller than the optical 
diffraction limit. More work is, however, still necessary in this emerging field to completely 
account for the role of the plasmonic nanostructures on the emitters that serve to create the super-
resolution images. 
 
8. Plasmon Linewidth 
 The plasmon linewidth is intimately relate d to the lifetime of the surface plasmon 
oscillation. Narrower linewidths correspond to slower dephasing times of the coherent plasmon 

===== PDF PAGE 29 =====

29 
 
electron oscillations and therefore longer lifetimes, while broader linewidths correspond to faster 
dephasing times.33 The homogeneous linewidth Γ is related to the dephasing time T2 of the 
coherent electron oscillation through the following relationship:33 
Γൌ
ଶ	԰	
்మ
      ( 1 9 )  
The dephasing time T2 is governed by elastic and inelastic decay processes, where the latter is 
dominant for nanoparticle plasmons and involves the decay of a plasmon into excited electrons 
and holes in both the conduction and valence band (i.e. intraband and interband excitations).33 
Here we will give a description of the homogeneous plasmon linewidth Γ as it can most readily 
be obtained from single particle spectroscopy.  
 The homogenous linewidth can be measured  using any single particle spectral 
characterization technique.33 The linewidth is obtained from the spectrum by fitting the plasmon 
resonance with a Lorentzian curve, and then calculating the full width at half maximum. In the 
case of more complicated nanoparticle shapes, additional Lorentzian contributions may be 
required to fit spectra that contain multiple resonances. The lineshape and linewidth are valuable 
parameters for excluding some nanoparticle aggregates based on optical measurements alone, 
because a non-Lorentzian lineshape or a significantly increased linewidth is a strong indicator for 
the presence of a nanoparticle aggregate.  
 The contributions to plasmon dephasing ar e usually expressed by writing the plasmon 
linewidth ߁as a sum of several plasmon damping terms according to:
33, 35, 42  
௜௡௧௘௥௙௔௖௘    (20) 
where ௕, ௥௔ௗ, and ௘ି௦௨௥௙, ௜௡௧௘௥௙௔௖௘correspond to bulk damping, radiation damping, damping 
due to electron surface scattering, and damping due to interfacial effects, respectively. The bulk 
damping term ௕ originates from electron scattering in the metal and is characteristic of the 

===== PDF PAGE 30 =====

30 
 
material. It is well described by the complex dielectric function of the metal and is hence 
frequency dependent. For gold nanoparticles, the linewidth increases as a function of increasing 
plasmon resonance energy, and additional plasmon broadening occurs at the onset of interband 
transitions at higher energies.13 
 The second term in equation 20 describes the energy loss mechanism due to coupling of 
the plasmon oscillation to the radiation field, also known as radiation damping. Radiation 
damping is especially important for larger nanoparticles, as it scales with the nanoparticle 
volume according to:8, 13 
ܸ21) 
where ௥௔ௗ is the radiation damping constant, with values ranging from 4 × 10 -7 to 12 × 10 -7 fs-1 
nm-3,8, 13 and V is the nanoparticle volume. Because a nanosphere with the same diameter as the 
length of a nanorod has at least twice the volume, radiation damping overwhelms any decrease in 
linewidth due to decreased intrinsic bulk damping for larger nanospheres with lower resonance 
energies.13 For gold nanoshells consisting of a central silica core with a thin metal coating, 
radiation damping remains dependent on the total nanoparticle radius, and not the metal shell 
thickness.10  
 When the one of the dimensions of a nanopart icle becomes shorter than the electron mean 
free path, damping contributions from electron surface scattering ௘ି௦௨௥௙ must be accounted 
for.1, 43 ௘ି௦௨௥௙ is inversely proportional to the nanoparticle’s dimensions and can be described 
for an arbitrary nanoparticle shape according to:43 
Γ௘ି௦௨௥௙ൌ
௦ಲ௩ಷ
௅೐೑೑
           (22) 
where ஺ is the surface scattering constant, vF is the Fermi velocity, and Leff is the effective path 
length of the electrons and is given by Leff = 4V/S with S being the surface area of the 

===== PDF PAGE 31 =====

31 
 
nanoparticles. The interpretation of Leff differs slightly for various nanoparticle shapes in the 
literature. For the simplest case of nanospheres, Leff simply becomes the radius of the 
nanoparticle.43 On the other hand, for gold nanoshells it has been determined that the effective 
length is dependent only on the metal layer thickness.10 For nanorods with aspect ratios larger 
than 2.5, it has been reported that Leff is only dependent on the nanorod diameter.8 In contrast, for 
SiO2 coated gold nanorods, it has recently been show that Leff = D0.5L0.5, where D and L are the 
diameter and length of the nanorods, respectively.44 
Excluding interfacial damping effects, the overall linewidth can then be expressed as: 
௕൅
௦ಲ௩ಷ
௅೐೑೑
ܸ23) 
Equation 23 demonstrates the size dependence of the plasmon linewidth. The 1st term is size 
independent, while the 2nd term dominates for nanoparticles with sizes smaller than about 20 nm. 
The 3rd term becomes important for larger nanoparticles. This relationship has been 
experimentally verified for gold nanorods with different sizes as illustrated in Fig. 11A, which 
plots the linewidth as a function of ௘௙௙.8 The size independent contribution from bulk 
damping sets the lower limit of the plasmon linewidth at 77 meV for the resonance energies of 
the investigated gold nanorods. The contribution from electron surface scattering (dashed line) 
increases linearly with ௘௙௙ as the effective length becomes smaller than the electron mean 
free path, while the contribution from radiation damping (dotted lines) decreases with ௘௙௙. 
The total linewidth (solid line) agrees well with experimental data from gold nanorods (black 
dots) and illustrates that the smallest linewidth is obtained for gold nanorods with a width of 
about 20 nm. 
 Fig. 11B furthermore demonstrates that th ere is a fundamental limit to how narrow a 
plasmon resonance can be and that this limit is determined by the bulk damping term ௕.45 As 

===== PDF PAGE 32 =====

32 
 
already discussed, ௕ is smaller for lower plasmon resonance energies. Another way to reduce ௕ 
though is to lower the temperature, as has been shown in a study of gold bipyramid 
nanoparticles.45 The plasmon linewidth decreases at lower temperatures due to a reduction in 
electron-phonon scattering. This behavior is illustrated by the scattering spectra of single gold 
bipyramids measured at 77 K (red) and 293 K (blue) and the dependence of the linewidth on 
resonance energy for these two temperatures in Fig. 11B. Only ௕ depends on temperature while 
radiation damping and electron surface scattering do not change significantly with temperature. 
At temperatures below 50 K, the linewidth becomes essentially temperature independent. 
Although the linewidth at low temperatures can be minimized via nanoparticle size and shape, 
which control radiation damping and electron surface scattering, there exists a fundamental 
width that cannot be further reduced, given as 43 meV for gold and 26 meV for silver 
nanoparticles 
45  
 Already for early ensemble st udies, it has been observed that the plasmon linewidth 
depends on the surrounding medium in a way that cannot be accounted for by the changes in the 
medium refractive index.1 Dielectric effects on the plasmon linewidth are weak because the bulk 
damping term only varies little over the typical range of induced resonance shifts. Furthermore, 
the observed linewidth changes are not correlated with the refractive index of the surrounding 
medium, but are rather chemical in nature. The last term in equation 20, interface damping 
(௜௡௧௘௥௙௔௖௘ሻ, has therefore been added to the description of the plasmon linewidth in a mostly 
phenomenological way to account for interfacial effects. It is believed that energy or electron 
transfer to surface bound molecules creates an additional relaxation pathway for nanoparticle 
surface plasmons, leading to shorter lifetimes and hence broader linewidths. As interface 
damping can be small, single particle studies are ideally suited to determine its contribution to 

===== PDF PAGE 33 =====

33 
 
the overall linewidth.35, 42 Fig. 12 shows an example where interface damping has been found for 
gold nanorods on a graphene substrate.35 In the absence of graphene (Fig. 12A), the plasmon 
linewidth of gold nanorods on a quartz substrate as a function of resonance energy can be fully 
described by bulk damping and radiation damping as verified by quasi-static calculations as well 
as FDTD simulations. Because the nanorods are wider than 20 nm, electron surface scattering 
can be neglected. When the nanorods are placed on a single graphene layer, the plasmon 
linewidth broadened by an average value of about 10 meV (Fig. 12B). In the absence of a 
significant refractive index induced plasmon resonance shift, the additional linewidth has been 
assigned to interface damping, in which a plasmon generated hot electron is transferred to the 
graphene (Fig. 12C). 
 The plasmon linewidth has important implications for sensing applications.
6 As is seen 
from Mie and Gans theory discussed in section 2, the plasmon resonance energy depends 
sensitively on the refractive index of the surrounding medium. With increasing refractive index 
the plasmon resonance shifts to longer wavelengths. This redshift is easier to observe for spectra 
with narrower linewidth. To compare the sensing capabilities of different plasmonic 
nanostructures, a figure of merit (FOM) has been introduced according to:6 
ൌ
௦௟௢௣௘൫௘௏	ோூ௎షభ൯
ிௐுெሺ௘௏ሻ              (24) 
where ݁݌݋݈ݏis the linear regression slope for the dependence of the plasmon resonance energy 
on the refractive index, and the full width at half maximum (ሻ is the plasmon linewidth. 
FOM values are evaluated by measuring the resonance energy of plasmonic nanoparticles in 
solvents with different refractive indices. Because of the narrower linewidth of single particle 
measurements, as compared to ensemble studies, larger FOM values can be achieved with single 
particles.6 However, for single particle sensors, the fact that the nanoparticles are typically 

===== PDF PAGE 34 =====

34 
 
supported by a substrate, which makes part of them inaccessible to the analyte, needs to be 
considered. 
 Several of the different singl e particle spectroscopy techniques discussed here have been 
applied to detect analyte molecules at a nanoparticle surface. Some of the most sensitive methods 
have even been able to detect the binding of single protein molecules, as measured by 
photothermal imaging
46 and a dark-field scattering approach that uses an intense coherent white 
light source and a sensitive electron multiplying CCD camera.47 Single analyte detection has also 
been achieved by taking advantage of a chemical amplification method, in which an enzymatic 
reaction dramatically amplifies the plasmon resonance shift.48 
 In addition to increased FOMs for plasmon re sonance sensing, many other applications of 
nanoparticle plasmons are enhanced by narrow linewidths as, for example, long plasmon 
lifetimes are desirable for processes that take advantage of the strong near-field intensity around 
plasmonic nanoparticles such as SERS and other surface enhanced spectroscopies.13 A general 
measure for a plasmonic nanoparticle’s sensing ability is often the quality factor Q, which is 
defined as:13 
ൌ
ாೝ೐ೞ
୻        ( 2 5 )  
where Eres is the plasmon resonance energy. Again, because of inhomogeneous linewidth 
broadening of especially colloidal nanoparticles quality factors are generally larger for single 
particles. For more discussion on sensing and other related phenomena the reader is referred to 
the vast literature on quality factors,49 plasmon resonance sensing,5, 6 or SERS3 for example. 
 
10. Conclusions 
 Single particle spectroscopy has become an invaluable tool to characterize plasmonic 

===== PDF PAGE 35 =====

35 
 
nanoparticles of arbitrary shape and size, especially when combined with correlated electron 
imaging and detailed electromagnetic calculations. 3D tomography of plasmonic nanoparticles 
and their assemblies has recently emerged and promises to further enhance our understanding as 
it is now possible to resolve the exact morphology including interparticle distances.50 The single 
particle spectroscopy methods reviewed here cover the size range of greatest interest for 
plasmonic nanoparticles and furthermore provide ways to measure the plasmon absorption and 
scattering separately, important for the diverse applications of plasmonic nanoparticles as 
sensors, antennas, or nanoscale heaters. 
 
 
Acknowledgements 
We acknowledge support from the Robert A. Welch Foundation (C-1664), ONR (N00014-10-1-
0989), NSF (CHE-0955286), and ARO (MURI W911NF-12-1-0407). J. Olson received support 
from the National Science Foundation through a Graduate Research Fellowship (0940902). A. 
Hoggard acknowledges support from the Keck Center of the Gulf Coast Consortia through the 
Nanobiology Interdisciplinary Graduate Training Program of the Gulf Coast Consortia (NIH 
Grant No. T32EB009379).  
  

===== PDF PAGE 36 =====

36 
 
References 
1. U. Kreibig and M. Vollmer, Optical properties of metal clusters, Springer, Berlin, 1995. 
2. C. F. Bohren and D. R. Huffman, Absorption and Scattering of Light by Small Particles, 
WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, 1983. 
3. S. Lal, N. K. Grady, J. Kundu, C. S. Levin, J. B. Lassiter and N. J. Halas, Chem. Soc. 
Rev., 2008, 37, 898-911. 
4. M. Hu, J. Chen, Z.-Y. Li, L. Au, G. V. Hartland, X. Li, M. Marquez and Y. Xia, Chem. 
Soc. Rev., 2006, 35, 1084-1094. 
5. K. A. Willets and R. P. Van Duyne, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2007, 58, 267-297. 
6. K. M. Mayer and J. H. Hafner, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3828-3857. 
7. S. Eustis and M. A. el-Sayed, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2006, 35, 209-217. 
8. C. Novo, D. Gomez, J. Perez-Juste, Z. Zhang, H. Petrova, M. Reismann, P. Mulvaney 
and G. V. Hartland, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2006, 8, 3540-3546. 
9. J. B. Lassiter, J. Aizpurua, L. I. Hernand ez, D. W. Brandl, I. Romero, S. Lal, J. H. 
Hafner, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1212-1218. 
10. C. L. Nehl, N. K. Grady, G. P. Goodric h, F. Tam, N. J. Halas and J. H. Hafner, Nano 
Lett., 2004, 4, 2355-2359. 
11. S. Schultz, D. R. Smith, J. J. Mock and D. A. Schultz, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 
2000, 97, 996-1001. 
12. C. Sönnichsen and A. P. Alivisatos, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 301-304. 
13. C. Sönnichsen, T. Franzl, T. Wilk, G. von Plessen, J. Feldmann, O. Wilson and P. 
Mulvaney, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2002, 88, 077402. 
14. H. Chen, L. Shao, T. Ming, K. C. Woo, Y. C. Man, J. Wang and H.-Q. Lin, ACS Nano, 
2011, 5, 6754-6763. 
15. S. Berciaud, L. Cognet, G. A. Blab and B. Lounis, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 93, 257402. 
16. W.-S. Chang, J. W. Ha, L.  S. Slaughter and S. Link, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 
107, 2781-2786. 
17. W.-S. Chang and S. Link, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 1393-1399. 
18. A. Gaiduk, P. V. Ruijgrok, M. Yorulmaz and M. Orrit, Chem. Sci., 2010, 1, 343-350. 
19. M. Selmke, M. Braun and F. Cichos, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2741-2749. 
20. A. Arbouet, D. Christofilos, N. Del Fatti, F. Vallee, J. R. Huntzinger, L. Arnaud, P. 
Billaud and M. Broyer, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 93, 127401. 
21. H. Baida, P. Billaud, S. Marhaba, D. Christ ofilos, E. Cottancin, A. Crut, J. Lermé, P. 
Maioli, M. Pellarin, M. Broyer, N. Del Fatti, F. Vallée, A. Sánchez-Iglesias, I. Pastoriza-
Santos and L. M. Liz-Marzán, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3463-3469. 
22. K. Lindfors, T. Kalkbrenner, P. Stoller and V. Sandoghdar, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 93, 
037401. 
23. L. S. Slaughter, W.-S. Chang, P. Swanglap, A. Tcherniak, B. P. Khanal, E. R. Zubarev 
and S. Link, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 4934-4938. 
24. G. Wang, W. Sun, Y. Luo and N. Fang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 16417-16422. 
25. L. Slaughter, W.-S. Chang and S. Link, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 2015-2023. 
26. N. J. Halas, S. Lal, W.-S. Chang, S. Link and P. Nordlander, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 
3913-3961. 
27. P. B. Johnson and R. W. Christy, Phys. Rev. B, 1972, 6, 4370-4379. 

===== PDF PAGE 37 =====

37 
 
28. M. M. Alvarez, J. T. Khoury, T. G. Schaaff, M. N. Shafigullin, I. Vezmar and R. L. 
Whetten, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 3706-3712. 
29. J. Zuloaga, E. Prodan and P. Nordlander, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5269-5276. 
30. V. Myroshnychenko, J. Rodriguez-Fernandez, I. Pastoriza-Santos, A. M. Funston, C. 
Novo, P. Mulvaney, L. M. Liz-Marzan and F. J. Garcia de Abajo, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 
37, 1792-1805. 
31. M. R. Beversluis, A. Bouhelier and L. Novotny, Phys. Rev. B, 2003, 68, 115433. 
32. C. Sönnichsen, S. Geier, N. E. Hecker, G. von Plessen, J. Feldmann, H. Ditlbacher, B. 
Lamprecht, J. R. Krenn, F. R. Aussenegg, V. Z.-H. Chan, J. P. Spatz and M. Möller, 
Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 77, 2949-2951. 
33. G. V. Hartland, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3858-3887. 
34. C. Novo, A. M. Funston, I. Pastoriza-Sant os, L. M. Liz-Marzán and P. Mulvaney, Angew. 
Chem., 2007, 119, 3587-3590. 
35. A. Hoggard, L.-Y. Wang, L. Ma, Y. Fang, G.  You, J. Olson, Z. Liu, W.-S. Chang, P. M. 
Ajayan and S. Link, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 11209-11217. 
36. Y. Song, Z. Zhang, H. E. Elsayed-Ali, H.  Wang, L. L. Henry, Q. Wang, S. Zou and T. 
Zhang, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 31-44. 
37. R. Jin, J. E. Jureller, H. Y. Kim and N. F. Scherer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 12482-
12483. 
38. L. Yang, B. Yan and B. M. Reinhard, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 15989-15996. 
39. B. Huang, M. Bates and X. Zhuang, Annu. Rev. Biochem., 2009, 78, 993-1016. 
40. K. L. Blythe, K. M. Mayer, M. L. Weber and K. A. Willets, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 
2013, 15, 4136-4145. 
41. H. Lin, S. P. Centeno, L. Su, B. Kenens, S. Rocha, M. Sliwa, J. Hofkens and H. Uji-i, 
ChemPhysChem, 2012, 13, 973-981. 
42. P. Zijlstra, P. M. R. Paulo, K. Yu, Q.-H. Xu and M. Orrit, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 
51, 8352-8355. 
43. W. A. Kraus and G. C. Schatz, J. Chem. Phys., 1983, 79, 6130-6139. 
44. V. Juvé, M. F. Cardinal, A. Lombardi, A. Crut, P. Maioli, J. Pérez-Juste, L. M. Liz-
Marzán, N. Del Fatti and F. Vallée, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2234-2240. 
45. M. Liu, M. Pelton and P. Guyot-Sionnest, Phys. Rev. B, 2009, 79, 035418. 
46. P. Zijlstra, P. M. R. Paulo and M. Orrit, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 379-382. 
47. I. Ament, J. Prasad, A. Henkel, S. Schmachtel and C. Sönnichsen, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 
1092-1095. 
48. S. Chen, M. Svedendahl, R. P. Van Duyne and M. Käll, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1826-1830. 
49. S. A. Maier, Curr. Nanosci., 2005, 1, 17-22. 
50. R. Leary, P. A. Midgley and J. M. Thomas, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 1782-1791. 
 
  
  

===== PDF PAGE 38 =====

38 
 
Figures and Captions 
 
Fig. 1  (A) Illustration of a localized surface plasmon for a spherical nanoparticle. (B) Mie theory 
calculation of the extinction (red), scattering (blue) and absorption (black) spectra of spherical 
gold nanoparticles with radii of 25 nm (left) and 50 nm (right). (C) Extinction (red), scattering 
(blue) and absorption (black) spectra calculated using Gans theory for ellipsoids with aspect ratio 
(AR) of 2.1 (solid line) and 3.0 (dotted symbol). The dielectric constant of the surrounding 
medium is chosen to be εm = 1 and 2.25 for calculations in (B) and (C), respectively. 


===== PDF PAGE 39 =====

39 
 
 
Fig. 2  (A) Dark-field scattering image (left) of silver nanoparticles and their spectra (right), for 
which the colors of the curves are matched to the corresponding colors in the image.11 (B) True 
color scattering image of a sample consisting of gold nanorods (appearing as red dots) and 60 nm 
nanospheres (appearing as green dots) collected in dark-field illumination geometry as illustrated 
in the upper left inset. Bottom right insets: TEM images of nanorods and a nanosphere.
13 
Reprinted with permission from refs 11 and 13. Copyright 2000 (ref 11) National Academy of 
Sciences, U.S.A., and Copyright 2002 (ref 13) American Physical Society. 


===== PDF PAGE 40 =====

40 
 
 
Fig. 3.  (A) Polarization sensitive dark-field scattering imaging of single gold nanorods, which 
appear as horizontally split doublets as indicated by pairs of red boxes. A birefringent crystal 
inserted before the CCD camera spatially separates orthogonal polarization components of the 
scattered light. Their relative intensities reflect the 2D orientations of the nanorods. (B) Top: 
Time trace of the total scattering intensity (black) and the respective intensities for the two 
orthogonal polarization components (red and green) recorded for a single nanorod. Bottom: 
Corresponding calculated 2D orientations of the nanorod as a function of time.12 Reprinted with 
permission from refs 12. Copyright 2005 American Chemical Society. 


===== PDF PAGE 41 =====

41 
 
 
Fig. 4  (A) Experimental realization of broadband extinction microscopy (left) and extinction 
spectrum of a single gold nanorod with a diameter of 120 nm (orange) and an aspect ratio of 3.1 
(right).  For comparison the scattering spectrum of a gold nanorod with a diameter of 24 nm (red) 
and the same aspect ratio is included. The inset shows SEM images of both nanorods. The sale 
bar is 100 nm.23 (B) Experimental scheme illustrating the interaction between a nanoparticle and 
the optical field in supercontinuum white light confocal microscopy (left) and normalized 
extinction spectra of single gold nanoparticles (right) with diameters of 60 (a), 31 (b), 20 (c), 10 
(d) and 5 (e) nm.22 (C) Differential interference contrast microscopy images of two gold 
nanorods at 10 different orientations. The excitation wavelengths are 540 nm and 720 nm as 
indicated by the green and red frames for each image, respectively.24 Reprinted with permission 
from refs 22, 23and 24. Copyright 2010 (refs 23 and 24) American Chemical Society, and 


===== PDF PAGE 42 =====

42 
 
Copyright 2004 (ref 22) American Physical Society. 
 
 
 
Fig. 5  (A) Experimental realization of spatial modulation spectroscopy. (B) Extinction spectra of 
a single silica shell coated silver nanoparticle (Ag@SiO
2) excited with two orthogonal linear 
polarizations (red and blue symbols). The dashed lines are fits to a theoretical model assuming a 
spheroidal nanoparticle shape. Inset: Extinction spectrum of a single Ag@SiO2 nanoparticle 
compared to the ensemble spectrum of the colloidal solution.21 Reprinted with permission from 
ref 21. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.  


===== PDF PAGE 43 =====

43 
 
 
Fig. 6  (A) Experimental scheme of a photothermal imaging microscope (top) and 3D image 
(bottom left) and intensity histogram (bottom right) of 1.4 nm gold nanoparticles.15 (B) Top: 
SNR of the photothermal signal for 20 nm gold nanoparticle as a function of probe power. 


===== PDF PAGE 44 =====

44 
 
Middle: Relative SNR of the photothermal signal for 20 nm gold nanoparticles in different media 
plotted as a function of photothermal strength (see text for definition). Bottom: Histogram of the 
SNR of the photothermal signal for 20 nm gold nanoparticles deposited directly on glass (dark 
grey) and on a thermal isolation layer consisting of 100 nm thick polymer film on a glass 
substrate (light grey). The nanoparticles are covered with glycerol.18 Reprinted with permission 
from refs 15 and 18. Copyright 2004 (ref 15) American Physical Society, and Copyright 2010 
(ref 18) Royal Society of Chemistry.  
 

===== PDF PAGE 45 =====

45 
 
 
Fig. 7  (A) Correlated SEM (left) and photothermal (right) images of gold nanorods. (B) 
Photothermal intensity of two single gold nanorods and a dimer as a function of the polarization 
of the heating beam. The color of the traces correspond to the colored boxes in the SEM image. 
The orientation of the gold nanorods is determined from the polarization dependent photothernal 
intensity as is evident from the 90° phase shift of the green and red curves for the two 
perpendicularly orientated single nanorods. The wavelength of the heating beam at 675 nm is 
resonant with the longitudinal plasmon resonance of the nanorods.16 Reprinted with permission 


===== PDF PAGE 46 =====

46 
 
from ref 16. Copyright 2010 National Academy of Sciences, U.S.A. 
 
 
 
Fig. 8  (A) SEM and (B) dark-field scattering images of single and clustered nanoshells. The 
bright region in (A) corresponds to a gold film that has been evaporated through a TEM finder 
grid with no carbon support film.
10 (C) SEM and (D) dark-field scattering images of a correlation 
box etched into ITO coated glass by FIB milling.34 (E) TEM and (F) second harmonic optical 
images of nanoparticle dimers and nanorods. Correlation is achieved with the aid of electron 
beam lithography to prepare markers on a silicon nitride window, transparent in both a TEM and 
an optical microscope.37 Reprinted with permission from refs 10, 34, and 37. Copyright 2004 (ref 
10) and 2005 (ref 37) American Chemical Society, and Copyright 2007 (ref 34) Wiley. 


===== PDF PAGE 47 =====

47 
 
 
Fig. 9  (A) TEM and (B) optical images of single Ag-Au hollow nanoparticles. (C) Scattering 
spectra of a hollow nanoparticle taken before (green) and after (red) TEM imaging. (D) 
Histogram of resonance energies of hollow nanoparticles before (green) and after (red) exposure 
to an electron beam.38 Reprinted with permission from ref 38. Copyright 2008 American 
Chemical Society. 


===== PDF PAGE 48 =====

48 
 
 
Fig. 10  (A-H) Super-resolution fluorescence imaging of a plasmonic nanowire using GSDIM. 
(A) Scattering and (B) far-field fluorescence images with of a gold nanowire. Super-resolution 
images constructed from the frequency histogram (C) and spatial intensity map (D) of individual 
fluorescence events. (E) SEM image of the nanowire and (F) enhanced SEM image to show the 
contrast of the nanowire edges. (G) Intensity histogram overlaid with the SEM image from (F). 
(H) Intensity histogram overlaid with the fluorescence image from (B). The scale bar in all 
images is 500 nm.40 (I-N) Super-resolution fluorescence imaging of plasmonic nanotriangles 
using PALM. (I) AFM image of a gold nanotriangle array. Super-resolution images constructed 


===== PDF PAGE 49 =====

49 
 
from the frequency histogram (J) and spatial intensity map (K) of the gold nanotriangles 
highlighted by the larger white box in (I). (L-N) Examples of high-resolution density maps of the 
individual gold nanotriangles marked by the dashed squares in (I).41 Reprinted with permission 
from refs 40 and 41. Copyright 2013 (ref 40) Royal Society of Chemistry, and Copyright 2012 
(ref 41) Wiley.  
 
 
 
Fig. 11  (A) Plasmon linewidth as function of 1/L
eff for gold nanorods with aspect ratios between 
2 and 4. Lines are the calculated linewidth from bulk damping (horizontal line), bulk damping 


===== PDF PAGE 50 =====

50 
 
plus electron surface scattering (dashed line), and bulk damping plus radiation damping (dotted 
line). The solid line shows the total linewidth resulting from all three contributions.8 (B) Single 
particle scattering spectra of gold bipyramids at 293 K and 77 K (top) and plasmon linewidth as 
a function of resonance energy for single bipyramids measured at these two temperatures 
(bottom).45 Reprinted with permission from refs 8 and 45. Copyright 2006 (ref 8) Royal Society 
of Chemistry, and Copyright 2009 (ref 45) American Physical Society. 
 
 
 
Fig. 12  (A) Plasmon linewidths as a function of resonance energy for single gold nanorod on 
quartz (Γ
Q, blue stars) and data binned in 0.03 eV intervals (ΓQ bin, blue circles) are compared to 


===== PDF PAGE 51 =====

51 
 
the linewidths calculated using a quasi-static model (ΓQSM, gray line) and FDTD simulations 
(ΓFDTD, purple circles). (B) Plasmon linewidths for single gold nanorods on graphene (ΓG, orange 
stars) and data binned in 0.03 eV intervals (ΓG bin, orange circles) are compared to the binned 
values measured for nanorods on quartz (ΓQ bin, blue circles) and the quasi-static model (ΓQSM, 
gray line). (C) Schematic energy diagram illustrating charge transfer between a gold nanorod 
(left) and graphene (right) following plasmon induced hot electron generation.
35 Reprinted with 
permission from ref 35. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 