

===== PDF PAGE 1 =====

Scattering-based Light Microscopy: From Metal Nanoparticles to
Single Proteins
Lee Priest, † Jack S. Peters, † and Philipp Kukura *
Cite This: https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.1c00271 Read Online
ACCESS Metrics & More Article Recommendations
ABSTRACT: Our ability to detect, image, and quantify nanoscopic objects and molecules with
visible light has undergone dramatic improvements over the past few decades. While ﬂuorescence
has historically been the go-to contrast mechanism for ultrasensitive light microscopy due to its
superior background suppression and speci ﬁcity, recent developments based on light scattering
have reached single-molecule sensitivity. They also have the advantages of universal applicability
and the ability to obtain information about the species of interest beyond its presence and location.
Many of the recent advances are driven by novel approaches to illumination, detection, and
background suppression, all aimed at isolating and maximizing the signal of interest. Here, we
review these developments grouped according to the basic principles used, namely dark ﬁeld
imaging, interferometric detection, and surface plasmon resonance microscopy.
CONTENTS
1. Introduction A
2. Key Principles B
3. Dark ﬁeld Imaging C
3.1. Introduction C
3.2. Total Internal Re ﬂection Scattering D
3.3. Rotating Coherent Scattering Microscopy F
3.4. Objective Coupling Mirror G
3.5. Dark ﬁeld Stop H
3.6. Dark ﬁeld Imaging Using Optical Waveguides H
4. Interferometric Imaging I
4.1. Introduction I
4.2. Interferometric Scattering Microscopy I:
Single Particle Tracking J
4.3. Interferometric Scattering Microscopy II:
Label-free Imaging M
4.4. Mass Photometry M
4.5. Interferometric Re ﬂectance Imaging Sensor O
4.6. Coherent Bright ﬁeld Imaging Q
5. Plasmonic Imaging R
5.1. Introduction R
5.2. Surface Plasmon Resonance Microscopy S
5.3. Biomolecular Imaging and Detection T
5.4. Resolution-enhanced Surface Plasmon Res-
onance Microscopy V
6. Summary and Outlook W
Author Information Y
Corresponding Author Y
Authors Y
Author Contributions Y
Notes Y
Biographies Y
Acknowledgments Y
Abbreviations Y
References Z
1. INTRODUCTION
S t r u c t u r ea n dd y n a m i c sa tt h en a n o s c a l ed e t e r m i n et h e
properties of matter and underpin the mechanisms of life. To
understand and ultimately control these properties and
functions, we must be able to visualize and thereby study matter
on nanoscopic length scales. Much eﬀort has thus been directed
at the development and optimization of methods capable of
detecting and characterizing nanoscopic objects. Broadly
speaking, these can be divided into scanning probe
approaches
1−4 and those using the interaction between incident
radiation and matter, including both electron microscopy and
light microscopy. Light microscopy has been popular due to its
noninvasive nature, dynamic operation, potential for high-
throughput, and straightforward integration with other tech-
nologies. However, these capabilities come at the expense of
inferior sensitivity and resolution, as compared to electron
microscopy or scanning probe methods.
Special Issue: Frontiers of Analytical Science
Received: March 31, 2021
Reviewpubs.acs.org/CR
© XXXX The Authors. Published by
American Chemical Society
A
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.1c00271
Chem. Rev. XXXX, XXX, XXX −XXX
Downloaded via UNIV OF OXFORD on October 5, 2021 at 09:43:26 (UTC).
See https://pubs.acs.org/sharingguidelines for options on how to legitimately share published articles.


===== PDF PAGE 2 =====

In the context of sensitivity, light microscopy arguably
reached its ultimate limit more than 30 years ago with the
detection of individual ions and molecules using absorption and
ﬂuorescence as contrast mechanisms.
5−7 These single-molecule
experiments were performed under cryogenic conditions with
speciﬁcally selected chromophores to maximize the interaction
strength between the incident light and the molecules of interest.
Single-molecule experiments in the form of single-emitter
ﬂuorescence detection and imaging have since become routine.
8
These experiments bene ﬁt from the speci ﬁc advantage of
ﬂuorescence: the spectral separation between illumination and
emission pro ﬁles, which enables e ﬃ cient background suppres-
sion. This makes it possible to identify speci ﬁc species in
complex mixtures and optically noisy environments, such as
living cells, as long as the surrounding objects are non- (or
weakly) ﬂuorescent at the combination of illumination and
detection wavelengths. The ability to switch ﬂuorophore
emission on and o ﬀ, both temporally and spatially, has also led
to the emergence of super-resolution imaging techniques, in
which the spatial resolution is now approaching the molecular
scale.
9−14
At the same time, using ﬂuorescence as a contrast mechanism
limits applicability of the most sensitive studies to species that
are either highly ﬂuorescent themselves or are made ﬂuorescent
by the introduction of external tags. Moreover, photochemical
and photophysical processes limit both signal intensities and the
degree to which signals are quantitative, which is often critical in
the analytical context. These limitations, in combination with
the prospect of a broader application scope, has driven the
development of ﬂuorescence-free methodologies. An alternative
approach to separate illumination from detection is to exploit a
geometric separation between them, as demonstrated by
Siedentopf and Zsigmondy in 1902, who presented the
ultramicroscope.
15 The orthogonal illumination and detection
pathways enabled the observation of light scattered by
nanometer-sized gold colloids. Since this work, many di ﬀerent
optical strategies have been developed to image scattered light in
the absence of background, and they are grouped together under
the term darkﬁeld microscopy. Originating from Zernike’s phase
contrast microscopy (PCM) in 1935, many technologies have
used interference between transmitted (or re ﬂected) incident
and scattered light as the primary image contrast mecha-
nism.
16−18 These include di ﬀerential interference contrast
(DIC),19,20 interference reﬂection microscopy (IRM), 21,22 and
reﬂection interference contrast microscopy (RICM), 23,24 all of
which have predominantly focused on studies of tissues, cells,
and supramolecular assemblies due to their lack of sensitivity for
nano-objects sub-20 nm in diameter.
In ﬂuorescence-free, extinction-based techniques, the contrast
is generated from a combination of the scattering and absorption
of incident light. Until recently, scattering-based techniques
exhibited inferior sensitivity when compared to their absorption-
based counterparts, which reached single-molecule sensitivity at
room temperature a decade ago.
25−27 Irrespective, the develop-
ment of scattering-based techniques has continued toward the
robust detection of single biological macromolecules, even in the
absence of absorption. The main advantage of these techniques
is their universal applicability, as any sample with a di ﬀerent
refractive index to its surrounding medium will generate a signal.
The key challenge in the context of studying nanoscale
phenomena is thus to develop experimental con ﬁgurations
which are capable of detecting and isolating the smallest possible
signals. This challenge is being addressed by a variety of e ﬀorts
to reduce the imaging background or amplify the signal of
interest.
In this review, we provide an overview of recent developments
in approaches detecting light scattering with optical microscopes
because of the underlying common architecture, although we
would like to emphasize the remarkable levels of sensitivity
achieved with alternative approaches, such as microcav-
ities.
28−30 After a brief introduction to the key concepts (section
2), we begin by reviewing advances in dark ﬁeld microscopy
(section 3 ), focusing on approaches aimed at maximizing
detection sensitivity by selecting photons that have interacted
with the object of interest. A natural extension involves the use of
illumination light to enhance the small signal that results from
the weak interaction with the nano-object by interference
(section 4). We conclude with an overview of e ﬀorts aimed at
introducing additional signal ampli ﬁcation with plasmonically
active substrates ( section 5) before providing a brief summary
and outlook ( section 6).
2. KEY PRINCIPLES
The fundamental challenge in imaging on the nanoscale arises
from the drop in interaction strength between the incident
electromagnetic radiation and the object as the object becomes
much smaller than the illumination wavelength, λ.T h i s
challenge can generally be compartmentalized into three key
parameters: resolution, speci ﬁcity, and sensitivity.
Spatial resolution, the minimum distance at which two
distinct points in a specimen can be distinguished, can be
divided into the lateral (X/Y) and axial (Z) dimensions.
Resolution is limited by the di ﬀraction of light as it passes
through a circular aperture, such as an objective lens, ultimately
restricting the achievable con ﬁnement of light and de ﬁning the
imaged projection of a point-source, the point-spread function
(PSF). This di ﬀraction barrier was ﬁrst introduced by Abbe,
31
with the lateral resolution limited to λ/2NA, where NA is the
numerical aperture of the objective lens, deﬁned by the refractive
index of the imaging medium multiplied by the sine of the
maximum angle over which light can be gathered from the
sample. Axial resolution is limited even further (2λ/NA
2) due to
the elliptical geometry of the PSF along this axis, creating an
additional challenge for resolving objects in three dimensions.
In the context of microscopy, speciﬁcity refers to the ability to
distinguish signals from di ﬀerent types of objects of interest
within a sample. This can be achieved by a variety of strategies,
including: analysis of the magnitude of a detected signal, surface
functionalization to promote speciﬁc binding and attachment of
multiple di ﬀerent ﬂuorescence or scattering labels. For the
techniques discussed in this review, speci ﬁcity relies on these
strategies as chemical speci ﬁcity is not inherently encoded
within Rayleigh scattering (in contrast to Raman scatter-
ing).
33,34
Finally, sensitivity refers to the ability of an instrument to not
only detect a signal from an object but to diﬀerentiate it from any
unwanted background signal, or noise. For an ideal experiment,
with no external or environmental noise, the noise- ﬂoor is
limited by the properties of the detector, such as dark noise and
read noise, as well as the quantum noise (referred to as shot
noise) associated with the counting of discrete particles
(photons) arriving at the detector. The width of this Poissonian
intensity distribution thus scales with √ N, where N is the
number of photons detected. Because of the well-de ﬁned
geometry of the PSF described above, it is possible to localize its
center of mass with subdiﬀraction limited precision by ﬁtting the
Chemical Reviews pubs.acs.org/CR Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.1c00271
Chem. Rev. XXXX, XXX, XXX −XXX
B


===== PDF PAGE 3 =====

PSF to a 2D Gaussian function,35 which enables high-resolution
tracking of the motion of an object of interest. Localization
precision is limited by the number of photons detected and can
be approximated as σ/√ N in a shot-noise-limited experiment,
where σ is the standard deviation of the PSF ﬁt.
36 This leads to
an interplay between the localization precision and temporal
resolution of a tracking experiment due to the limited number of
photons that can be detected per unit time. In ﬂuorescence-
based approaches, the number of photons detected per unit time
is limited by optical saturation of the ﬂuorophore. In scattering-
based approaches, there is no a priori limited photon budget
provided by the scattering object, so the limitation is determined
by either sample/optical damage thresholds or saturation of the
detector.
Intuitively, the strength of the interaction between light and
an object should scale with the polarizability of the object, which
is a measure of its ability to respond to and interact with an
incident electromagnetic wave. Assuming that the object of
interest can be approximated as a sphere, which is often a good
approximation for nanoscopic objects much smaller than the
diﬀraction limit, it can be treated as a point dipole with a
polarizability given by
i
k
jj
j
j
j
j
y
{
zz
z
z
z
z
α ε
εε
εε=
−
+V3 2m
pm
pm (1)
where εm/p is the complex permittivity of the medium and
particle respectively, and V is its volume. 37 The polarizability
then yields the scattering and absorption cross sections as
σ
π
αλ=| | −8
3
scat 2
2 4
(2)
σ π
λ α= Im2 ()abs (3)
which sum to yield the extinction cross-section, σext. For
nonresonant particles, σscat dominates the detected signal. The
dependence of σscat on the square of the volume of the particle is
primarily responsible for the di ﬃ culty of detecting very small
objects without the use of a label: a reduction in the diameter of a
sphere by a factor of 10 reduces the intensity of scattered light by
10
6 for a given incident photon ﬂux. While this can be somewhat
alleviated by plasmonic scattering enhancement for materials
such as silver and gold, the volume of the nanoparticle still
dominates the magnitude of its scattering signal.
Generally speaking, when shining light on a sample, the
detected signal intensity at a given point in the image ( I
det) can
be written as the sum of the ﬁelds associated with the relatively
unperturbed incident light ( Ei) and the light scattered by the
presence of an object ( Es):
=| + | =| | +| | + *I EE E E R e E E 2( )det i s
2
i
2
s
2
is (4)
The scattered light ﬁeld is proportional to the complex
polarizability of the object, implying both linear and quadratic
dependencies of the two signal contributions on the volume of
the object, a feature that can be taken advantage of. In the
context of extinction measurements, the cross-term in eq 4
indicates that spatial mode matching between the wavefronts of
the two ﬁelds is desirable for e ﬃ cient extinction to occur. A
tightly focused Gaussian beam has a stronger dipolar character
compared to plane wave illumination and hence improves the
interaction with a dipolar nanoscopic scatterer resulting in
increased extinction e ﬃ ciency.
38 This e ﬀect on the extinction
signal is somewhat unsurprising if considered from the
perspective of maximizing the ratio of the extinction cross-
section to the area of the illumination pro ﬁle (σ/A).
It is also important to note that, for a point source located near
a refractive index interface, a high proportion of the incident
light is scattered into the higher index material, resulting in this
light being collected at large angles by the objective lens.
39−41
Consequently, illuminating the sample via the low NA regions of
the objective, such as in wide- ﬁeld illumination, provides an
opportunity to spatially discriminate between the scattered and
transmitted/reﬂected illumination light in the back focal plane
(BFP) of the objective. This can be advantageous when
attempting to manipulate eq 4 , and therefore the contrast of
the ﬁnal image, by perturbing one ﬁeld relative to the other.
42−45
Thus far, we have only considered the signal arising from the
object of interest, but the presence of background light poses the
most signi ﬁcant limitation to object sensitivity. Unwanted
background light can emanate from multiple sources, such as
other scattering objects in the sample, surface inhomogeneity of
the sample substrate (typically a glass coverslip), or stray
reﬂections from components in the optical system. For
conventional bright ﬁeld illumination, the largest background
contribution arises from the illuminationﬁeld, which renders the
small signal from a nano-object signal very di ﬃ cult to detect.
All approaches discussed in this review attempt to manipulate
the relative magnitudes of the di ﬀerent contributions in eq 4 ,
with the ultimate goal of detecting and in some cases obtaining
additional information about the object through E
s. Dark ﬁeld
imaging ( section 3 ) refers to methods that minimize any light
that has not interacted with the object of interest, Ei,i n
detection. The focus is thus on detecting and quantifying |Es|2,
which becomes increasingly challenging the smaller the object
becomes due to the V
2 scaling in the presence of competing
background signals. Alternatively, one can attempt to reduce the
relative magnitude of background signals by focusing on the
interference term 2 Re(E
iEs*), which is the target of interfero-
metric microscopy ( section 4 ). As both of these methods will
eventually face the limitation of ﬁnite illumination powers and
polarizabilities, additional steps can be taken to increase Ei
beyond what can be achieved in a straightforward illumination
approach, for instance by taking advantage of plasmonic e ﬀects
(section 5).
3. DARKFIELD IMAGING
3.1. Introduction
The most intuitive way to maximize the sensitivity of a
microscope is to isolate the photons that interacted with the
species of interest from any background signal, a concept
optimized in single molecule ﬂuorescence imaging, where this
isolation is achieved by ﬁltering for photons of speci ﬁc
wavelengths during both illumination and detection. In the
context of scattering detection, analogous e ﬀorts to maximize
background rejection can be broadly grouped under the term
darkﬁeld microscopy.
46−50 The major di ﬀerence, in this sense,
between ﬂuorescence imaging and dark ﬁeld microscopy is that
the illumination light is of the same wavelength as the scattered
light, meaning that background rejection cannot be achieved by
orthogonal optical ﬁlters. In terms of eq 4, we eliminate E
i, as far
as possible, meaning that in an ideal scenario:
∼| |I Edet s
2 (5)
Chemical Reviews pubs.acs.org/CR Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.1c00271
Chem. Rev. XXXX, XXX, XXX −XXX
C


===== PDF PAGE 4 =====

In practice, most approaches are variations on the original theme
introduced by Siedentopf and Zsigmondy more than a century
ago.
15 While ﬁeld separation in this case was achieved by
detecting scattered light orthogonally to the direction of
illumination, this has since been achieved through the use of
appropriately placed beam stops, apertures, or re ﬂective optics.
In the context of this review, the key limitation and challenge
faced by dark ﬁeld approaches, in the spirit of detecting ever
smaller objects, can be traced to the V
2 scaling of the purely
scattered term and the presence of imaging background. As a
result, dark ﬁeld microscopes perform well when detecting and
imaging objects with a diameter on the order of >20 nm but
struggle immensely to reach the 5 nm scale required for single
macromolecules or small nanoparticles. While light scattered by
such small objects could still in principle be detected, this rapid
drop in scattered power has in practice been overwhelmed by
stray light from the sample or any components in the imaging
setup. Even if the background signal intensity wereﬁxed over the
course of a measurement, such that it could be isolated from the
analyte signal and thus subtracted from the ﬁnal image, an
extremely high dynamic range measurement would be required
to detect the signal from a single molecule. Most recent e ﬀorts
aimed at improving the performance of dark ﬁeld microscopes
have thus focused on innovative approaches to separate the
scattered light from the background light, and in this section we
review those approaches.
3.2. Total Internal Re ﬂection Scattering
Total internal reﬂection (TIR) refers to the reﬂection of incident
light at a refractive index boundary and provides a convenient
means of containing the illumination light at the glass −water
interface. This is usually achieved by directing a laser beam onto
the sample substrate at an angle above the critical angle, which
generates an evanescent ﬁeld within a few hundred nanometers
of the surface of the substrate. This type of illumination has been
heavily utilized in total internal re ﬂection ﬂuorescence (TIRF)
microscopy.
51−53 TIR illumination can be advantageous in
darkﬁeld microscopy as the signal ideally only contains
contributions from scatterers close to the surface of the
substrate, thereby minimizing stray light. The ﬁrst use of TIR
illumination in a dark ﬁeld microscope was presented by
Ambrose in 1956, where cells in water were imaged on the
surface of a glass slide, which was illuminated above the critical
angle via a glass prism ( Figure 1A).
54,55 In this section, we will
focus on objective-type total internal re ﬂection scattering
(TIRS) microscopy, which was introduced as an alternative to
prism-based illumination by Braslavsky et al.
56 In objective-type
TIR illumination, the critical angle is reached by using the outer
edges of the entrance pupil of a suitably high-NA oil immersion
objective, as previously demonstrated by Stout and Axelrod in
TIRF microscopy.
57 In the original objective-type TIRS study,56
two diﬀerent optical set-ups were suggested, both based on an
inverted microscope and using a beamsplitter to direct the
illumination into the objective lens and a ﬁeld stop to block the
back-reﬂected beam at a position where the BFP of the objective
lens is reimaged. The authors demonstrated the sensitivity of the
technique by imaging 20 nm gold nanoparticles (GNPs) and 60
nm polystyrene beads.
While we refer throughout this section to reported perform-
ance characteristics, such as localization precision and temporal
resolution, these parameters are not necessarily comparable
across techniques. The reason is that the ultimate performance
depends on the details of the experimental arrangement beyond
the optical approach: detection e ﬃ ciency, mechanical stability,
illumination power, and alignment details in terms of back-
ground suppression. Nevertheless, the reported literature values
provide an indication of what is possible and has been
demonstrated, which should be considered in combination
with the approach as a whole.
For objective-type TIR, the key challenge involves coupling
the illumination light in and out of the imaging objective, while
minimizing the amount of stray light reaching the detector.
Generally, this is best achieved by placing the reﬂective elements
as close as geometrically possible to the entrance pupil of the
objective, which minimizes back re ﬂections from the multiple
lenses within the objective ( Figure 1 B). While reimaging is a
possibility, as in the original study by Braslavsky et al.,
56 focusing
a laser beam into the BFP of a high-NA objective lens produces a
number of divergent re ﬂections, which can be di ﬃ cult to
eliminate in a reimaging con ﬁguration. In objective-based
darkﬁeld techniques, there is an interplay between background
suppression and the e ﬀective NA of the optical system, as
blocking stray light reduces scattered light collection.
Figure 1. Commonly employed approaches to scattering-based total internal re ﬂection microscopy. (A) Prism-type total internal re ﬂection
microscopy. (B) Objective-type total internal reﬂection microscopy. P, prism; OBJ, objective; L, tube lens; M, mirror; BB, beam block; C, camera. (C)
Image of a 20 nm GNP on a glass coverslip taken with an optimized objective-type TIRS microscope, scale bar = 0.5μm. (D) Schematic illustrating the
ﬁelds involved with TIRS microscopy, Ei incident ﬁeld, Es scattered ﬁeld, Ee evanescent ﬁeld, θ incident angle of illumination, which is greater than the
critical angle, θc. (C) adapted with permission from ref 58. Copyright 2021 Philipp Kukura.
Chemical Reviews pubs.acs.org/CR Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.1c00271
Chem. Rev. XXXX, XXX, XXX −XXX
D


===== PDF PAGE 5 =====

Noji and co-workers approached this problem by introducing
a perforated mirror. 59 The concept behind perforated mirror
TIR dark ﬁeld is to sacri ﬁce spatial resolution and collection
eﬃ ciency in exchange for background suppression. The optical
setup is based on a standard TIRF microscope, with the dichroic
mirror exchanged for a perforated mirror, a mirror with an
elliptical hole in the center that allows a portion of the scattered
light to pass while blocking the re ﬂected illumination beam
(Figure 2A). When viewed along the optical axis, the elliptical
hole in the perforated mirror acts as a circular aperture, which
prevents the introduction of aberrations from asymmetrically
cutting the NA ( Figure 2B). In proof-of-principle experiments,
40 nm GNPs were imaged with 0.1 ms temporal resolution on a
glass surface (Figure 2C). The resulting SNR was 1.5−2.1 times
higher for perforated mirror TIR dark ﬁeld as compared to an
epi-illumination dark ﬁeld microscope with a dot mirror. This
improvement resulted from the increase in background
suppression and occurred despite a considerable drop in the
NA of the optical system caused by the interception of scattered
light by the perforated mirror.
In ﬂuorescence-free microscopy, GNPs are regularly used as
scattering labels due to the relatively large scattering cross-
section for the particle size as a result of plasmonic enhance-
ment. This concept was combined with perforated mirror TIR
darkﬁeld to study multiple molecular motors with high
spatiotemporal resolution. Labeling the γ-subunit of the F
1-
ATPase motor with a 40 nm GNP enabled the rotational motion
of the motor to be tracked with 9.1 μs time resolution and a
localization precision on the order of 1 −2n m( Figure 2 D).
Building on this work, the rotational dynamics of the F
1-
ATPase,60−64 V1-ATPase,65,66 and V0V1-ATPase67 motors have
been studied using this technique. A similar labeling approach
was used to study the stepping mechanism of the myosin VI
motor, obtaining a spatiotemporal resolution of 2 nm and 37
μs.
68 Isojima et al. used the technique to visualize intermediate
states between the 8 nm steps of the kinesin-1 motor by probing
the motion of a kinesin head with a temporal resolution of 55 μs
and a spatial precision of 1.3 nm. 69 In addition, Nakamura et al.
studied the ∼50 nm/s stepping movement of Settatia marcescens
chitinase A and detected the 1 nm forward and backward steps
this motion consists of by tracking the position of the scattering
label with 0.3 nm localization precision and 0.5 ms temporal
resolution.
70
In addition to studies using scattering labels like those
highlighted above, perforated mirror TIR dark ﬁeld microscopy
has been used for label-free detection of ∼100 nm diameter
inﬂuenza virus particles, immobilized on glass with a detection
limit of 1.2 × 104 plaque-forming units (PFU)/mL. 71 The
authors used scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and
ﬂuorescence microscopy to con ﬁrm that the dark ﬁeld micro-
scope was capable of imaging single in ﬂuenza virus particles as
opposed to aggregates.
Recently, perforated mirror TIR dark ﬁeld microscopy has
undergone multiple technological developments. Iino and co-
workers introduced an axicon lens into the illumination path to
generate an annular illumination pro ﬁle at the BFP of the
objective.
72 This method enabled greater illumination inten-
sities compared to previous implementations, as the illumination
intensity was limited by the damage threshold of the objective
lens when irradiated with a stationary, focused beam. This
illumination scheme improved the localization precision of the
technique to 1.3 Å for 40 nm GNPs and 1.9 Å for 30 nm GNPs
with 1 ms time resolution. This development was applied to
study the stepping motion of processive dynein with 100 μs
temporal resolution and 0.7 nm localization precision.
73 A
further development by the same group introduced a multiple-
wavelength illumination scheme, which is capable of tracking
diﬀerent types of metal nanoparticles simultaneously by
exploiting their associated plasmon resonances and introducing
a spectrometer in the imaging path.
74
An alternative strategy for separating scattered from back-
ground light when using TIR illumination involves introducing a
pair of micromirrors close to the back aperture of the
microscope objective to couple illumination in and out of the
imaging path. This arrangement can yield very high optical
eﬃ ciency, with 94% of the collected backscattered light passing
the micromirrors.
58 In addition, the approach is capable of
highly e ﬀective background suppression through the inter-
ception of back reﬂections from the objective. The sensitivity of
the technique was demonstrated by imaging 20 nm GNPs in
water immobilized on a glass coverslip with shot-noise-limited
localization precision and a signal-to-background ratio close to
100. As a proof of principle, the authors tracked the position of
20 nm silver and GNPs di ﬀusing at an oil −water interface with
∼1 nm spatial precision and 10 μs temporal resolution, using
stroboscopic illumination.
Figure 2. Perforated mirror TIR darkﬁeld microscopy. (A) Schematic demonstrating the separation of scattered light from the re ﬂected illumination
beam. OBJ, objective lens; PM, perforated mirror. (B) View from the back aperture of the objective looking down the optical axis. (C) Image of 40 nm
GNP in water immobilized on a glass slide. (D) Rotational motion of 40 nm gold-nanoparticle-labeled F 1-ATPase at 2 mM ATP, with the inset
displaying an example trace from which the data is obtained. (C,D) Adapted with permission from ref 59. Copyright 2010 Elsevier.
Chemical Reviews pubs.acs.org/CR Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.1c00271
Chem. Rev. XXXX, XXX, XXX −XXX
E


===== PDF PAGE 6 =====

In addition to tracking the location of the scattering label,
polarization-sensitive dark ﬁeld microscopy is capable of
simultaneously determining the orientation of gold nanorods
(GNRs)75 due to the strongly polarized scattering response of
the nanoparticle.37,76 In a recent demonstration of this concept,
Mazaheri et al. tracked 71 nm × 25 nm GNRs di ﬀusing on a
supported lipid bilayer with a temporal resolution of 2.3 μs,
lateral localization precision of 3 nm, and rotational precision of
4°, using a polarization-sensitive objective-type TIRS micro-
scope.77
3.3. Rotating Coherent Scattering Microscopy
As noted by Abbe in 1873, oblique, coherent illumination of a
sample results in a factor of 2 improvement to the achievable
spatial resolution when compared to illumination at normal
incidence,
31,78 due to higher orders of diﬀraction being collected
by the objective lens. Illuminating two adjacent objects at an
oblique angle and in the direction of the alignment of the two
objects results in a time-delay between the illumination of each
object. For coherent illumination, this induces a phase-o ﬀset
between the scattered ﬁelds emanating from the two objects,
which interfere at the detector ( Figure 3 C). Destructive
interference between the scattered waves allows an intensity
separation of the two objects at a distance of ∼λ/4 apart. Many
structured coherent illumination and synthetic aperture imaging
techniques have demonstrated improved resolution by leverag-
ing this e ﬀect.79−83
When illuminating complex samples containing multiple
scattering objects in this way, however, the interference of
coherent scattering events produces unwanted speckle patterns
and interference artifacts. One approach of overcoming these
artifacts is to illuminate the sample sequentially from all
directions. In this way, for any orientation of adjacent objects,
there will be two instances where they are illuminated from
opposite directions along their alignment axis. Incoherent
addition of the coherent images results in a suppression of the
coherence artifacts and a strong separation contrast. This
concept is the basis for rotating coherent scattering (ROCS)
microscopy, which was ﬁrst introduced by Rohrbach and co-
workers.
84−88
In the ﬁrst iteration of TIR dark ﬁeld ROCS microscopy, a
spatial light modulator was used to deﬂect the illumination beam
to acquire 72 partial images, each taken with TIR illumination at
ad iﬀerent azimuthal angle, which were incoherently averaged to
obtain a ﬁnal image.
84 In this experimental setup, the scattered
light was separated from background light by placing a ﬁeld stop
in a plane conjugate to the objective’s BFP. In proof-of-principle
experiments, 190 nm polystyrene beads were imaged in water to
showcase the improved spatial resolution. A potential downside
of ROCS microscopy is that minor image distortions are
introduced,
78 with scattering objects appearing to be located
further apart than their physical distance.
Introducing a two-axis scan mirror, which scanned the beam
in a ring pattern across the BFP of the objective within a single
exposure of the detector (Figure 3A,B),85 removed the need for
post processing and enabled an acquisition rate up to 100 Hz.
The technique was applied to image J774 mouse macrophages
and 200 nm thin helical bacteria with a frame rate of 63 and 100
Hz, respectively, achieving spatial resolution of∼150 nm despite
the decrease in eﬀective NA of the optical system due to theﬁeld
stop blocking the re ﬂected illumination beam in the detection
path. The authors demonstrated the improvement in spatial
resolution, by comparing TIR-ROCS images with TIRF images
acquired using the same objective lens and a similar detection
wavelength, which yielded a spatial resolution of ∼210 nm.
Alternatively, darkﬁeld ROCS can be performed without relying
on TIR, which can be advantageous when studying species
which are located away from the surface of the coverslip.
89 The
authors used this approach in conjunction with optical tweezers
and interferometric BFP tracking to study the bending of
microtubules attached to optically trapped beads.
In addition to operating in dark ﬁeld mode, ROCS can be
operated in bright ﬁeld mode by removing the dark ﬁeld stop,
enabling interference between the collected scattered light and
the back-re ﬂected light. Bright ﬁeld ROCS was introduced by
Jünger and Rohrbach, who used it in combination with TIR-
darkﬁeld ROCS to investigate the activity of the cytoskeleton of
Figure 3. ROCS microscopy principle and representative results. (A) Schematic of ROCS microscopy. OBJ, objective; BS, beamsplitter. (B)
Translation of the illumination beam in a ring pattern around the back aperture of the objective lens. (C) Schematic of interference between adjacent
scatterers < λ/2 apart. Under the condition of normal incidence, the scattered waves constructively interfere at the detector, whereas for oblique
illumination, a phase delay ofΔφ = π is introduced between the two scattered waves, leading to destructive interference at the detector and enabling the
scatterers to be resolved. (D) TIR-darkﬁeld ROCS image of 200 nm polystyrene beads illumination from a single azimuthal angle. (E) An image from
the same sample once the beam is scanned in the pattern from B during a single detector exposure. (F) and (G) are the TIR-brightﬁeld equivalents to D
and E, respectively. (C) adapted with permission from ref85. Copyright 2016 Springer Nature under Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International
License https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.( D−G) adapted with permission from ref 91. Copyright 2018 Optical Society of America.
Chemical Reviews pubs.acs.org/CR Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.1c00271
Chem. Rev. XXXX, XXX, XXX −XXX
F


===== PDF PAGE 7 =====

J774 mouse macrophages. 90 This approach was further
developed by utilizing the full collection e ﬃ ciency of a 1.46
NA objective lens, leading to higher detection NA at the expense
of lower imaging contrast, relative to an identical setup with a
darkﬁeld stop in the detection path.
91 This was demonstrated by
imaging 200 nm polystyrene beads with both imaging modalities
(Figure 3 D−G). In both dark ﬁeld and bright ﬁeld ROCS, it is
clear that the coherence artifacts present in images acquired with
illumination from a single oblique angle are not present in
images acquired with the illumination averaged over all
azimuthal angles. By controlling the spatial coherence of the
illumination light with a rotating di ﬀuser, the authors showed
that maximizing the spatial coherence of the illumination light
leads to optimum image contrast and resolution.
3.4. Objective Coupling Mirror
In addition to operating with TIR illumination described above,
eﬃ cient separation of illumination from detection can be
achieved in epi-illumination by a single, small mirror which
directs the illumination into the objective lens and allows the
returning scattered light to pass. This concept was implemented
by Xie and co-workers, who used a small circular mirror attached
to a glass window to couple the illumination beam diagonally
into the objective. 92 The small mirror enabled the majority of
scattered and reﬂected light to pass, with separation obtained by
inserting a ﬁeld stop after the ﬁrst lens in the detection path, due
to the o ﬀset locations of the scattered and re ﬂected light image
planes. The authors used this microscope to track 100 −150 nm
GNPs endocytosed within lysosomal vesicles inside live cells,
moving along microtubules and being transported by molecular
motors, with 25 μs temporal resolution and 1 −2 nm spatial
precision using a quadrant photodiode (QPD) in detection. The
diagonal illumination approach used in this microscope was
adapted from the scheme developed by Nishiyama et al., who
combined transmission dark ﬁeld microscopy with an optical
trap and demonstrated the presence of ∼4 nm substeps within
the 8 nm step of kinesin.
48 The ∼4 nm substeps elucidated in
this study were recently observed using multiple di ﬀerent
techniques.93,94
An alternative version of this approach was developed by
Berry and co-workers. In their version, a small rod mirror
situated close to the back aperture of the objective lens directs
Figure 4. Schematic and data from an objective coupling mirror dark ﬁeld microscope. (A) Schematic of the experimental setup. OBJ, objective lens;
RM, rod mirror. (B) View from the back aperture of the objective looking down the optical axis toward the rod mirror. (C) Image of a 100 nm GNP
attached to a ﬂagellar motor on top of an Escherichia coli cell, scale bar = 1 μm. (D) Traces of the displacement of a 100 nm GNP attached to a bacterial
ﬂagellar motor, the black and gray lines correspond to X and Y displacement, respectively. (C,D) Adapted with permission from ref95. Copyright 2010
AIP Publishing.
Figure 5. Darkﬁeld stop schematics and performance. (A) Schematic illustrating the separation of illumination and scattered light. OBJ, objective; DS,
darkﬁeld stop. (B) View from the back aperture of the objective lens looking along the optical axis toward a 4 mm dark ﬁeld stop. (C) Image of 20 nm
GNPs in water with 1 ms integration time. (D) Fluorescence image of ATTO 610 molecules without the use of an opticalﬁlter with 100 ms integration
time. (E) Traces of the ﬂuorescence emission of the molecules labeled in (D). (C−E) adapted with permission from ref 42. Copyright 2014 American
Chemical Society.
Chemical Reviews pubs.acs.org/CR Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.1c00271
Chem. Rev. XXXX, XXX, XXX −XXX
G


===== PDF PAGE 8 =====

the illumination along the optical axis ( Figure 4 A).95 The rod
mirror and its mount blocked less than 10% of the area of the
back aperture of the objective lens while intercepting back
reﬂections from the objective and interfaces within the sample
due to its position ( Figure 4 B). They tested the microscope
performance by imaging a 100 nm GNP bound to a ﬂagellar
motor on top of an Escherichia coli cell ( Figure 4 C). The low
background signal from the Escherichia coli cell, relative to the
signal generated by the 100 nm GNP, was attributed to the poor
backscattering eﬃ ciency of the cell, as the cell is a signi ﬁcantly
larger particle which scatters the majority of the light in the
forward direction - a potential bene ﬁt for further in vivo
applications. As a proof-of-principle demonstration, the micro-
scope was also used to track the rotation of the bacterial ﬂagellar
motor at a frame rate of 110 kHz by labeling the hook of the
motor with a 100 nm GNP ( Figure 4D). Further in vivo studies
of that motor using the same technique generated torque-speed
curves of the motor under various conditions and allowed
measurement of stepwise speed changes at low load.
96,97
As a further demonstration of epi-illumination objective
coupling mirror dark ﬁeld, Noji and co-workers employed
polarization-sensitive detection 75 and defocused image anal-
ysis98 to track both the position and orientation of 80 nm × 40
nm GNRs, with 10 μs temporal resolution and ∼1° azimuthal
angle precision. 99 In addition to determining the azimuthal
angle, the defocused image analysis method was capable of
simultaneously extracting the polar angle of the GNRs with ∼1°
precision.
3.5. Darkﬁeld Stop
Another strategy to obtain e ﬃ cient separation of background
and scattered light combines a ﬁeld stop with transmission
illumination (Figure 5A).42 This strategy leads to highly eﬃ cient
background suppression (>10 7) because the illumination beam
does not pass through the objective toward the sample,
signiﬁcantly reducing re ﬂections being directed toward the
camera. In the setup devised by Weigel et al., the dark ﬁeld stop
was fabricated from blackened aluminum and was signi ﬁcantly
larger than the illumination beam, sacri ﬁcing scattered light
collection e ﬃ ciency for superior background suppression
(Figure 5 B). The sensitivity of the microscope was demon-
strated by imaging 20 nm GNPs in water immobilized on a glass
coverslip ( Figure 5 C) and 10 nm GNPs binding to a glass
coverslip in water at an acquisition rate of 100 Hz. The high
background suppression enabled single molecule ﬂuorescence
detection without the use of an optical ﬁlter (Figure 5D,E).
3.6. Darkﬁeld Imaging Using Optical Waveguides
In addition to objective-based dark ﬁeld microscopy, the sample
can also be illuminated by an evanescent ﬁeld generated as the
light propagates through a waveguide. In waveguide scattering
microscopy (WSM), the scattered light is e ﬃ ciently separated
from the background by aligning the illumination and detection
pathways orthogonal to each other ( Figure 6A,D). Evanescent
illumination using wavegui des has also been utilized in
ﬂuorescence microscopy.
100−102
WSM was ﬁrst introduced by Thoma et al. in 1997, who
applied the technique to image thin ﬁlms using an evanescent
ﬁeld penetrating the surface of an ion-exchanged slab wave-
guide. 103 One advantage of waveguide-based evanescent
illumination over objective-based evanescent illumination is
that the depth of the evanescentﬁeld can be tailored over a much
larger range by adapting the geometry and refractive indices of
the materials used to construct the waveguide.
101 In addition,
the orthogonal placement of the objective lens relative to the
guided wave removes the need for placing re ﬂective optics,
Figure 6. Darkﬁeld imaging in optical waveguides. (A −C) Evanescent scattering using waveguide illumination. (A) Schematic of the experimental
setup. OBJ, objective; SMF, single mode ﬁber; WC, waveguide core. (B) Image of 150 nm ﬂuorescently labeled lipid vesicles, scale bar = 2 μm. (C)
Scattering intensity trace of 18 nm GNPs binding to a 100 nm lipid vesicle. (D −F) Darkﬁeld imaging in a nanoﬂuidic optical ﬁber. (D) Schematic of
experimental design. OBJ, objective; WC, waveguide core; NC, nanochannel. (E) Example traces of CCMV virions di ﬀusing in the optical ﬁber. (F)
Image of a mixture of 19−51 nm polystyrene beads. (B,C) adapted with permission from ref 106. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (E,F)
adapted with permission from ref 112. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.
Chemical Reviews pubs.acs.org/CR Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.1c00271
Chem. Rev. XXXX, XXX, XXX −XXX
H


===== PDF PAGE 9 =====

apertures, or beam blocks in the detection path, and a much
larger ﬁeld of view (FOV) can be illuminated. Ni et al. applied
the technique to nanoparticles by imaging GNRs as small as 85
± 9 × 30 ± 4 nm, coated on the core surface of an etched
multimode optical ﬁber.
104 Cahoon and co-workers built on this
concept by imaging ∼150 nm × 50 nm GNRs and silicon
nanowires with diameters down to 50 nm, using glass coverslips
and microscope slides as waveguides. 105 In this study, the
authors presented diﬀerent experimental conﬁgurations capable
of detecting the forward and backscattered light from the
nanoparticles.
Agnarsson et al. introduced a waveguide chip that was capable
of single particle ﬂuorescence and scattering measurements
(Figure 6A).
106,107 In this technique, the sample was exposed to
the core of the waveguide by etching a sample well into the
polymer cladding layer on top of the silica core ( Figure 6 A).
Light was coupled in to the single-mode waveguide via a single-
mode ﬁber, which generated an evanescent ﬁeld that penetrated
the core −water interface. Particles binding to the core −water
interface were detected through scattering of the evanescent
ﬁeld, which was collected by a water immersion objective lens
oriented perpendicular to the waveguide. To generate a low-
intensity background, the waveguide chip was constructed from
an extremely smooth silica core sandwiched between two layers
of CYTOP, a ﬂuorinated polymer with a refractive index of 1.34,
close to that of water. As a proof-of-concept experiment, the chip
was used to image ﬂuorescently labeled lipid vesicles with a
diameter of 150 nm, demonstrating that the chip was capable of
detecting the light scattered by biological nanoparticles ( Figure
6B). Furthermore, the technique was used to analyze the kinetics
of phospholipase A2 enzymes digesting 100 nm vesicles and to
image individual 18 nm GNPs binding to lipid vesicles with a
diameter of 100 nm ( Figure 6C). Building on this initial work,
the technique was applied to analyze the size-dependent binding
of ligand-functionalized GNPs to lipid membranes.
108 In other
studies, the chip ’s ability to enable imaging of single vesicles
using both scattering and ﬂuorescence has been used to study
the formation of lipid membranes, 109 the lipid content of
extracellular vesicles, 110 and the e ﬀect of the addition of
monomeric α-synuclein on various types of lipid vesicles. 111
In addition to utilizing the evanescentﬁeld that is generated as
the light propagates through the waveguide, it is also possible to
illuminate with the guided laser mode directly. Manoharan and
co-workers designed a single-mode silica ﬁber containing a
subwavelength cylindrical nano ﬂuidic channel to image nano-
particles with high levels of sensitivity ( Figure 6 D).
112 The
nanoparticles were illuminated with a guided optical mode that
was coupled into the ﬁber using a low-magni ﬁcation objective
lens. A portion of the light scattered by the nanoparticles was
collected by an oil immersion objective, which was oriented
perpendicular to the illumination. The ﬁber exhibited very low
background scattering, leading to a low-intensity, stationary
background which was removed computationally. In proof-of-
principle experiments, a mixture of polystyrene beads ranging
from 19 to 51 nm traveling through the ﬁber were imaged and
tracked with a frame rate of 1 kHz ( Figure 6F). The localization
error of the technique ranges from <50 to 300 nm depending on
the size of the nanoparticle, with the error largely induced by
motion blur at the limited frame rate of the detector. In addition,
the technique was used successfully to image and track wild-type
cowpea chlorotic mottle virus (CCMV) virions with a diameter
of 26 nm ( Figure 6E), and was capable of operating with frame
rates of up to 3.5 kHz. Building on this work, Faez et al.
developed a technique termed nanocapillary electrophoretic
tracking (nanoCET), which combined the technique described
above with two microelectrodes, both oriented perpendicular to
the ﬁber and situated along its plane.
113 An alternating voltage
was applied between the two electrodes to drive a 60 nm GNP
back and forth along the channel at a frequency of up to 200 Hz,
leading to measurements of the electrophoretic mobility of the
particle at a frame rate of 2 kHz.
Jiang et al. advanced ﬁber-based scattering microscopy by
introducing an optical ﬁber capable of tracking nanoparticles in
three dimensions.
114 The micro ﬂuidic channel was displaced
from the core of the ﬁber in one dimension so that a
homogenized evanescent ﬁeld was generated in this dimension
of the channel. This enabled the 3D position of the particle to be
extracted by analyzing the location and intensity of the PSF.
Proof-of-principle experiments tracked 50 nm GNPs in three
dimensions at a frame rate of 2 kHz, with <3 nm and ∼21 nm
localization accuracy in the lateral and axial dimensions,
respectively. In this initial study, to obtain the evanescent
illumination conditions described above, the refractive index of
the liquid in the microchannel was set to 1.44. Improvement of
the data analysis procedure extended this method to more
complex illumination pro ﬁles, enabling the channel to be ﬁlled
with water and paving the way to biological studies.
115 Another
technological development was introduced by Förster et al., who
incorporated a hollow-core ﬁber with a channel diameter over an
order of magnitude larger than that used by Manoharan and co-
workers.
112,116,117 This ﬁber enabled more particles to be
studied simultaneously. In initial experiments, 40 nm GNPs and
Escherichia coli virus λ phages were imaged and tracked. In those
experiments, the sensitivity was lower than in aforementioned
experiments conducted by Manoharan and co-workers due to
the incorporation of a low-magniﬁcation, low-NA oil immersion
objective, as resolution and the collection e ﬃ ciency were
sacriﬁced in exchange for a large depth of ﬁeld.
4. INTERFEROMETRIC IMAGING
4.1. Introduction
Since the introduction of PCM in 1935, 16 many optical
microscopy technologies have employed interference as the
contrast mechanism. Despite the developments introduced by
DIC microscopy,
19,20 IRM,21 and RICM,23 ultrasensitive optical
detection of non ﬂuorescent nano-objects remained largely
limited to dark ﬁeld microscopy. As discussed in the previous
section, however, the square-dependence of the optical signal
intensity on object volume in dark ﬁeld microscopy has resulted
in real-world limitations to the achievable detection sensitivity.
These limitations can be circumvented to some degree by the
introduction of a reference light ﬁeld to the optical signal. The
resulting intensity at the detector, I
d,t h e nb e c o m e sa
superposition of the reference ﬁeld, Er = Ereiϕ r, and the ﬁeld
scattered from the probed nano-object, Es = Eseiϕ s, such that eq 4
now reads:
ϕ=| + | = + +I EE II E E 2c o sdr s
2
rs r s (6)
where Ir and Is represent the intensity of the reference and
scattered light respectively, andϕ = ϕ r − ϕ s, represents the phase
oﬀset between the reference and scattered ﬁelds. As the particle
size decreases, the pure scattering term decreases rapidly in
magnitude such that, for subwavelength nano-objects, the
detected irradiance can be approximated as
Chemical Reviews pubs.acs.org/CR Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.1c00271
Chem. Rev. XXXX, XXX, XXX −XXX
I


===== PDF PAGE 10 =====

ϕ≈+I IE E 2c o sdr r s (7)
Unlike dark ﬁeld microscopy, the presence of reference light
dominates the detected intensity, and any analyte signal appears
as a small perturbation in the ﬁnal image with contrast, c, given
by
ϕ ϕ= − ==c II
I
EE
I
E
E
2c o s 2 cosdr
r
rs
r
s
r (8)
The potential for ultrasensitive optical detection with
interferometric scattering as the contrast mechanism stems
from the linear proportionality of the signal to the nano-object
volume, as opposed to the square dependence in dark ﬁeld
imaging. Detection based on interferometric scattering di ﬀers
from darkﬁeld imaging in two further signi ﬁcant ways. First, the
magnitude of the interferometric term is not only determined by
the electric ﬁeld amplitude but also by the phase di ﬀerence
between the interfering ﬁelds. Second, the challenge involves the
detection of the interferometric term, which is not only much
smaller than the reference ﬁeld but can be lost among unwanted
interferometric signals. It is these two parameters that current
methods thus focus on: optimizing the phase diﬀerence between
incident and scattered light and the relative magnitudes ofE
r and
Es, which does not a ﬀect the nominal measurement sensitivity
but is important for matching the detected light intensity to the
capabilities of the detector and the ability to ﬁne-tune the focus
of the microscope.
Similar to dark ﬁeld imaging and the precursors to modern
interferometric detection technologies, the ultimate challenge
for ultrasensitive optical detection with interferometric scatter-
ing remains the same: eliminating background signatures that
overwhelm the signal, in this case the interferometric term.
These can be largely attributed to two sources: (1) Additional
background light, often due to spurious back-re ﬂections from
optics and backscattering from rough detection surfaces. (2)
Shot-noise-induced ﬂuctuations in the detected reference light, |
E
r|2, which can mask a small interferometric signal.
In terms of background scattering, the advantage of
interferometric approaches is the weaker, linear, scaling with
object volume, meaning that the detected signal drops more
slowly for smaller objects. It is important, however, to recognize
that this di ﬀerence in scaling does not make interferometric
detection signi ﬁcantly more sensitive than dark ﬁeld imaging
(within a factor of √ 2). The main reason why interferometric
methods have been more successful than dark ﬁeld methods at
detecting the smallest objects in recent years comes down to
limitations of dynamic range in detection coupled with the
unavoidability of a certain level of background scattering as a
result of imperfect surfaces. As an example, while it may be
feasible to detect a signal that is 1/100 of the background in
interferometric imaging, the same challenge in darkﬁeld imaging
would amount to detecting a signal that is 1/10000 of the
background.
In terms of the signal-to-noise ratio of the measurement, the
initial challenge is to ensure that the measurement is mainly
limited by shot noise, rather than by other noise sources, such as
mechanical vibrations, laser intensity noise, or background
ﬂuctuations. Suppressing these additional noise sources
becomes a more signi ﬁcant challenge as the shot-noise-induced
ﬂuctuations are reduced to the levels required for single-
molecule detection. In addition to this, detecting a su ﬃ cient
number of photons to reach such noise-ﬂoor levels might require
the signal from detector pixels or recorded frames to be averaged
together, thus sacri ﬁcing localization precision and temporal
resolution, respectively. The temporal averaging of consecutive
frames increases the e ﬀective full well capacity of the detector,
however, as the averaging window is increased, nonshot-noise
contributions, such as sample drift, become increasingly
prominent. This results in the breakdown of the SNR ∝√ N
relationship for larger averaging windows (>50 ms). In this
section, we discuss a variety of recent methods that attempt to
optimize the phase and amplitude of E
r to varying degrees,
depending on the speciﬁc application and the magnitudes of the
noise.
4.2. Interferometric Scattering Microscopy I: Single Particle
Tracking
Interferometric scattering microscopy (iSCAT) can, in its
simplest form, be thought of as the laser-illumination equivalent
of IRM,
21,22 in which the stability of a common-path geometry
(whereby the interfering light ﬁelds share a near-identical optical
path to the detector) is coupled with the reference ﬁeld
attenuation and axial sensitivity of a re ﬂection-based con ﬁg-
uration. In re ﬂection-based microscopes, the majority of the
incident light is transmitted such that the reference ﬁeld
intensity is essentially a measure of the re ﬂectivity at the
substrate−sample interface. While this does improve the image
Figure 7. Interferometric scattering microscopy principles and example experimental arrangements. (A) Schematic of wide ﬁeld illumination iSCAT.
(B) Schematic of rapid beam scanning illumination iSCAT. OBJ, objective; BS, beamsplitter (nonpolarizing); QWP, quarter-waveplate; PBS,
polarizing beamsplitter; L1, illumination lens; L2, imaging lens; C, camera. (C) Confocal detection iSCAT image of 20 nm GNPs on a glass coverslip in
water. (D) Principle of interferometric scattering microscopy, E
i incident ﬁeld, Es scattered ﬁeld, Er reﬂected reference ﬁeld, Δφ phase di ﬀerence
between the scattered and re ﬂected ﬁelds. (C) Adapted with permission from ref 121. Copyright 2006 Optical Society of America.
Chemical Reviews pubs.acs.org/CR Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.1c00271
Chem. Rev. XXXX, XXX, XXX −XXX
J


===== PDF PAGE 11 =====

contrast compared to that of an analogous transmission-based
microscope, it is important to note that it does not improve the
overall shot-noise-limited SNR of the experiment, due to the
overall photon deﬁcit and the resulting e ﬀect on the shot noise.
Though the term iSCAT was ﬁrst coined by the Sandoghdar
group,
118 its earliest practical implementation was reported
using a laser-scanning confocal microscope equipped with a
50:50 beamsplitter imaging microtubules at a glass −water
interface.
119 The resulting images exhibited a remarkable signal-
to-background ratio of ∼10, implying a detection limit on the
order of ∼300 tubulin monomers and making this early
reﬂective laser microscope one of the most powerful label-free
biosensors of the time. Lindfors et al. then used a re ﬂective laser
microscope with sample scanning to demonstrate record
detection sensitivity and spectroscopic characterization of
GNPs down to 5 nm in oil,
120 a concept that quickly expanded
to biological environments 121 and virus detection and
tracking.122 Static detection sensitivity has reached as far as
cadmium selenide quantum dots 123 and 2 nm gold particles on
suitable substrates.124
Two illumination schemes are widely used in iSCAT
microscopy: wide ﬁeld and rapid beam scanning. Wide ﬁeld
illumination uses a lens to focus the illumination into the BFP of
the objective, yielding eﬀectively plane-wave illumination of the
sample (Figure 7A). This illumination scheme is the method of
choice for obtaining the highest possible temporal resolution, as
the acquisition rate is not limited by the rate of beam scanning.
The second illumination scheme, rapid beam scanning
illumination, uses a pair of acousto-optic de ﬂectors (AODs),
which scan a focused beam across the sample, generating an even
illumination pro ﬁle while removing ring artifacts and reducing
speckle patterns observed in wideﬁeld iSCAT (Figure 7B). This
illumination approach has often been implemented in
combination with a polarization-dependent method to separate
the signal from the illumination path using a quarter-wave plate
(QWP) and polarizing beamsplitter (PBS), to maximize
collection e ﬃ ciency. The progress of iSCAT over the past
decade, as well as the historical context of its development from
technological precursors, have been covered in detail in recent
reviews.
125−128 Here, we will focus on recent technological
developments in the context of single-particle tracking (SPT).
For SPT, localization precision and imaging speed are
ultimately limited by the number of photons that can be
detected from the scatterer in a ﬁnite time window. Nano-
particles, speci ﬁcally (GNPs), are commonly used as labels as
they are inert, provide a strong extinction signal due to their
polarizability, and do not su ﬀer the drawbacks of ﬂuorescent
alternatives. Laser-based i llumination provides access to
incident photon intensities only limited by sample damage
and detector full-well depth. As a result, high spatiotemporal
resolution can be obtained through a variety of combinations of
lateral localization precision and temporal resolution depending
on the experimental requirements due to the trade-o ﬀ between
these two parameters. For example, in a recent study, the
tracking of 20 nm GNPs was performed with a 2 nm precision,
on the μs time scale.
129 More recently, this has been pushed
toward an acquisition rate of 913 kHz and sub-10 nm
localization precision for 20 nm GNPs di ﬀusing on a supported
lipid bilayer. 130 The sensitivity and measurement precision
achievable with iSCAT has enabled optimization of nanoparticle
binding131 and the study of mobility di ﬀerences between
supported and suspended bilayer membranes. 132
In addition to studying membrane mobilities, iSCAT has
recently found applications in elucidating the mechanisms of
molecular motor processivity.
94,133,134 For example, iSCAT was
used to track the position of 30 nm GNP scattering labels
attached to the motor domains of kinesin-1 motor proteins, with
a localization precision of ∼2 nm at an acquisition rate of 1
kHz.
94 More recently, studies have emerged that take advantage
of the high spatiotemporal resolution of iSCAT to visualize and
characterize the dynamics of cytoskeletal ﬁlaments, speci ﬁcally
microtubules.
135 Maintaining the imaging capabilities of iSCAT
requires highly e ﬃ cient suppression of background signals,
which is relatively straightforward in the aforementioned
scenarios but much more challenging in the presence of large
objects, such as cell bodies. While in principle, background
subtraction approaches can be employed, they are limited to any
changes that occur in the background during the desired
Figure 8. Combination of interferometric scattering detection and single particle traps. (A −C) Anti-Brownian electrokinetic trap (ISABEL). (A)
Illustration of the scanning pattern of the illumination beam. (B) Schematic of the trapping algorithm. (C) Trace of iSCAT contrast with time of a
trapped 40 nm GNP. (D−G) Nanoﬂuidic rocking Brownian motor capable of sorting GNPs based on their size. (D) Topography of the sorting device.
(E) Schematic of the method of separation of 60 and 100 nm GNPs. (F) iSCAT images displaying the separation of 60 and 100 nm GNPs. (G) Plot of
position vs median relative brightness of the particles in the device before and after sorting. (A −C) Adapted with permission from ref 144. Copyright
2019 American Chemical Society. (D−G) Adapted with permission from ref 149. Copyright 2018 The American Association for the Advancement of
Science.
Chemical Reviews pubs.acs.org/CR Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.1c00271
Chem. Rev. XXXX, XXX, XXX −XXX
K


===== PDF PAGE 12 =====

exposure time, resulting in studies so far being limited to labels
of 30 nm diameter or larger. 136−138
An additional challenge, and opportunity, of performing
iSCAT on cells is the fact that the labels no longer diﬀuse only in
2D, where the phase relationship between scattered and
reﬂected light is constant, but also in 3D, where it varies rapidly
with the distance of the label from the re ﬂective cover glass
surface. Early studies used a simple interpretation of eq 6 to
extract three-dimensional information both in solution 139 and
on cells; 137 this was recently replaced by a more sophisticated
PSF analysis, which makes it possible to achieve sub-10 nm
localization precision in both the lateral and axial directions at
microsecond acquisition speeds. 136 In this way, the authors
could study subdi ﬀusion and nanoscale con ﬁnement of GNP-
labeled epidermal growth factors in live HeLa cells. Additionally,
the trajectory of a GNP-labeled protein was used to reconstruct
a map of the nanoscopic topology of cellular structures, such as
the surface of a ﬁlopodium. Subsequent development of
interferometric PSF analysis has built upon this work to further
demonstrate the applicability of iSCAT to 3D SPT in live,
complex environments. 138,140 The long observation times of
these tracking measurements, up to tens of minutes in length,
highlights a key advantage of scattering labels compared to
ﬂuorescent alternatives.
Alternative approaches to extend iSCAT detection beyond
two-dimensional imaging have been explored by Hong, Cho,
and co-workers. 141 Remote focusing iSCAT (RF-SCAT), in
which imaging depth, and thus the vertical tracking range, is
increased by vibration-free v ertical image scanning. By
implementing an additional 4f telecentric system, the wavefront
from the BFP of a high-NA, oil immersion objective, coupled to
the sample, can be reimaged into the BFP of a lower-NA, air
objective, before being focused onto a reference mirror. The
vertical image sections can be selected without movement of the
sample stage or imaging objective by translating the axial
position of the reference mirror. This optical con ﬁguration
enabled a trackable depth for nanoparticles of 10 μm.
The ability to use iSCAT in three dimensions with high levels
of sensitivity is important because it removes the need for
immobilization on a surface, which can be as perturbative, if not
more perturbative, than the incorporation of ﬂuorescent labels.
In this regard, the combination of the anti-Brownian electro-
kinetic (ABEL)
142,143 trap with iSCAT, termed ISABEL,
enabling trapping and closed-loop feedback tracking of nano-
scale particles in solution is particularly attractive ( Figure 8).144
A challenge compared to other nanoparticle applications arises
from the fact that the trapped object is not bound to the glass
surface and can move along the optical axis, which causes
changes in optical contrast ( Figure 7 D). The ABEL trap then
ensures that the particle is constrained to the trapping region
(Figure 8A), through tracking its position with detection rates
up to 10 kHz, calculating the particle displacement vector from
the center and applying an electricﬁeld to move the particle back
to the center of the trap ( Figure 8 B,C). In addition to the
ISABEL trap, various other single-particle traps have utilized
iSCAT detection as an alternative to ﬂuorescence.
139,145−149
The combination of iSCAT detection and single particle traps
represents an important advance, especially in the context of the
potential future expansion toward single proteins
32,33 and
combination with motion control and sorting. 148,149 The
incorporation of iSCAT detection in a nano ﬂuidic rocking
Brownian motor capable of sorting GNPs into populations
based on their diameters was presented by Knoll and co-
workers.
149 The device used a combination of deep and narrow
ratchets angled to the left, embedded within wide and shallow
ratchets angled to the right ( Figure 8 D). This enabled the
separation of 60 and 100 nm GNPs upon application of an
external oscillating electric ﬁeld, with the 60 nm GNPs traveling
along the shallow channel to the right and the 100 nm particles
traveling along the deep channel to the left (Figure 8E−G). The
position of the nanoparticles in the device was imaged using
iSCAT at an acquisition rate of 1 kHz.
Figure 9. Interferometric scattering microscopy of microtubules and type IV pili. (A) Images of a microtubule acquired with light polarized parallel
(left) and perpendicular (right) to the microtubule. Scale bar: 1 μm. (B) Composite kymograph of isotropic (red) and anisotropic (green) scattering
combined. Scale bars: 1 μm (vertical) and 1 s (horizontal). (C) The proﬁle of the mean contrast (black) and anisotropic contrast (red) averaged from
disassembling microtubules. (D) Cross sections of the iSCAT (top left) and super-resolved (top right) microtubule images inset. (E −H) iSCAT
images of diﬀerent steps in the type IV pili cycle of a Pseudomonas aeruginosa cell, scale bar = 2 μm. (E), (F), (G), and (H) correspond to extension,
attachment, tension, and detachment, respectively. (A −D) Adapted with permission from ref 154. Copyright 2021 John Wiley and Sons. (E −H)
Adapted with permission from ref 155. Copyright 2019 Springer Nature.
Chemical Reviews pubs.acs.org/CR Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.1c00271
Chem. Rev. XXXX, XXX, XXX −XXX
L


===== PDF PAGE 13 =====

4.3. Interferometric Scattering Microscopy II: Label-free
Imaging
The enhanced interferometric signal generated by the plasmon
resonance of GNPs is roughly equivalent to that of a dielectric
particle with about twice the diameter of a GNP. Given the size
range of many biomolecules, for example, virus particles (20 −
200 nm), iSCAT is well-suited for imaging such objects without
the need for labels. Initial studies reported the label-free optical
detection of single virus particles bound to supported membrane
bilayer receptors.
118,122 Manoharan and co-workers also tracked
the position and orientation of unlabeled bacteriophages to
nanometer precision and monitored the changes in iSCAT
contrast as a function of virion DNA content.
150 This allowed
the DNA ejection dynamics of individual bacteriophages, upon
the addition of LamB receptor, to be investigated. Subsequently,
the same group quanti ﬁed the assembly kinetics of individual
MS2 bacteriophage capsids around MS2 RNA, identifying
features of capsid growth that would otherwise be unresolved in
bulk measurements.
151 The iSCAT signal intensities of the RNA
genome of MS2 bacteriophages, tethered to a functionalized
glass surface, were monitored upon the introduction of MS2
coat-protein dimers. The ratio of the iSCAT signal to the
number of coat proteins bound to the RNA strand was suﬃ cient
to infer potential assembly pathways.
Another target for label-free iSCAT have been microtubules,
as in the original study by Amos and Amos.
119 In that study, the
authors imaged microtubules bound to standard microscope
cover glass. This was later extended to gliding assays employed
by Andrecka et al. 152 As microtubules exhibit anisotropic
scattering proﬁles, their iSCAT contrast is polarization-depend-
ent relative to their orientations, a property previously explored
for GNRs in both iSCAT and dark ﬁeld modalities.
75,77,99,153
Parallelized polarization-sensitive iSCAT detection recently
enabled studies of not only microtubule motion but also
disassembly.
154 Diﬀerential image contrasts from the two
orthogonal polarization projections (Figure 9A) were presented
in the form of a composite kymograph ( Figure 9B) to show the
change in relative isotropic a nd anisotropic scattering
contributions, indicating a mass change at the microtubule tip
(Figure 9 C). Incremental images, temporally separated by 19
ms, provided quantitative information on disassembly rates and
were used to reconstruct super-resolution images which enabled
detection of tubulin oligomer detachment, with a theoretical
detection limit of ∼3 tubulin dimers (Figure 9D). Obtaining the
diﬀerential contrast from the two orthogonal projections
(Figure 9 A) enabled reconstruction of super-resolved images
and nanoscopic structural changes at the tip of a disassembling
microtubule from changes to scattering anisotropy on a
submillisecond time scale.
Persat and co-workers trans itioned iSCAT imaging of
biological ﬁlaments toward the cellular context.
155 To achieve
this, they imaged type IV pili (TFP), ﬁlaments assembled at cell
surfaces used by bacteria to attach to surfaces, move and resist
ﬂow. These ﬁlaments have been challenging to image using light
microscopes due to the detrimental e ﬀects of ﬂuorescent
labeling on the cell ’s ability to (dis)assemble the ﬁlaments,
which is central to their function. Using iSCAT, the ﬁlaments
could be imaged in a label-free fashion ( Figure 9E−H), despite
the strong scattering background from the cell body. In addition,
the dependence of the iSCAT signal on the distance from the
glass surface made it possible to di ﬀerentiate between di ﬀerent
functional states, such as extension ( Figure 9 E), attachment
(Figure 9 F), development of tension ( Figure 9 G), and
eventually detachment ( Figure 9H).
The ability to detect and image biological nanoparticles in
aqueous solution naturally extends to lipids and the structures
they form such as lipid nanodomains,
156 lipid bilayers, 157 and
micelle and vesicle formation during autocatalytic pro-
cesses.
158 −160 iSCAT is particularly well-suited to this
application, as it enables label-free visualization of chemical
reactions by monitoring the production or destruction of
nanoparticles. While nanoparticle formation can be monitored
by bulk methods such as dynamic light scattering (DLS)
161,162
or NMR, the ability to detect individual particles provides access
to the earliest stages of nanoparticle formation, often part of the
“lag phase ” caused by the invisibility of particles at very low
concentrations for bulk methods. In addition, single particle
detection allows much improved characterization of sample
hetero/homogeneity compared to methods providing average
particle size only.
4.4. Mass Photometry
At the very extremes of sensitivity, iSCAT has been used to
detect, image, localize, and track individual proteins in a label-
free fashion.
32,33,163,164 The interferometric contrast generated
by protein molecules, which are weakly scattering objects, is a
function of their refractive index and proportional to their
volume. Given that proteins consist of amino acids, which
exhibit small variations in refractive index
165 and speci ﬁc
volume,166 the refractive index contribution to the contrast
should be e ﬀectively constant, and the volume should be
proportional to the mass, resulting in a linear relationship
between iSCAT contrast and protein mass. The earliest
demonstrations of single-protein iSCAT sensitivity used this
relationship to provide evidence for single-molecule sensitiv-
ity.
32,33
Given the enormous power of native mass spectrometry (MS)
in the context of studying biomolecular structure and dynamics,
label-free single molecule detection, and mass quanti ﬁcation
have immense potential. 167,168 Early implementations, 32,33
however, failed to provide the resolution, accuracy, or precision
exceeding that of well-established ensemble-based scattering
approaches such as DLS.
161,162 Solutions of proteins of diﬀerent
mass could be distinguished, but the resolution was insu ﬃ cient
to quantify mixtures of di ﬀerent species, and the accuracy
insuﬃ cient to con ﬁdently identify species directly by mass,
which are some of the key advantages of native MS.
The challenge in non ﬂuorescent single-molecule imaging
relates to the capability of the optical system to distinguish the
weak analyte signal from the cacophony of background light
contributions. Imaging in a reﬂective conﬁguration and applying
a sliding window background subtraction algorithm to subtract
static background can go some way toward addressing this
issue.
43 However, a typical iSCAT measurement of single
proteins in solution yields image contrasts of approximately
0.4%/MDa of molecular mass.32,33 Thus, a perfectly shot-noise-
limited measurement of a 250 kDa protein, with an SNR of 10,
would require the collection of 10
8 photoelectrons. Con-
sequently, because of the full-well-capacity limitations of
commercially available cameras (<10 5), this photoelectron
requirement must be ful ﬁlled by means of spatiotemporal
averaging, limiting resolution and potentially introducing
additional background noise.
In the context of biomolecular mass measurements, and the
accuracy and mass resolution demanded by applications in
Chemical Reviews pubs.acs.org/CR Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.1c00271
Chem. Rev. XXXX, XXX, XXX −XXX
M


===== PDF PAGE 14 =====

Figure 10. Numerical aperture ﬁltered iSCAT. (A) Schematic of the dipole emission pattern for a point scatterer at a refractive index interface; n0 and
n1 represent the refractive indices of the media (n 1>n0). (B) Emission pattern at the back aperture of a high-NA (1.42) microscope objective for a
nanoscopic scatterer at a glass−water interface illuminated with circularly polarized light. The inner outlined circle indicates the position of the partial
reﬂector (top panel). Normalized emission density as a function of numerical aperture. Gray shaded region corresponds to the position of the partial
reﬂector (bottom panel). (C) Raw iSCAT image of a glass coverslip covered by water. (D) Equivalent image with the addition of a T = 1% partial
reﬂector in the optical setup. Scale bar: 1 μm. (E) Illustration of a photothermal spatial light modulator (PT-SLM). (F) XY cross-section of the
temperature proﬁle across the PT-SLM (top left panel), equivalent XZ cross-section (top right panel). Scale bar: 100 μm. The two white dashed lines
indicate the boundaries of the thermo-optic material. XY cross-section of the resulting refractive index variation (bottom left panel) and equivalent XZ
cross-section (bottom right panel). (G) Phase-shift proﬁle of a plane wave propagating through the structure in z at the position of the red dashed line
in (I). (H,I) Normalized iSCAT images of 30 nm single gold nanospheres at total heating powers incident on the modulator structure of 0 mW (L) and
110 mW (M). Scale bar: 500 nm. (B −D) Adapted with permission from ref 43. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (E −I) Adapted with
permission from ref 169. Copyright 2021 Springer Nature under Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License https://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/.
Figure 11. Mass photometry principle and applications. (A) Scattering contrast histogram acquired from binding events of 12 nM BSA. (B) MP images
of a BSA monomer, dimer, trimer, and tetramer, scale bars = 200 nm. (C) Contrast to mass relationship for a range of proteins. (D,E) Relationship
between contrast and number of base pairs in double-stranded (D) and single-stranded (E) DNA. (F) Mass histogram of Escherichia coli bo3 oxidase
isolated from lauryl maltose-neo-pentyl glycol detergent micelles. (G) Mass histograms of di ﬀerent ratios of Escherichia coli outer membrane protein
trimers solubilized in amphipols. (A−C) Adapted with permission from ref34. Copyright 2018 American Association for the Advancement of Science.
(D,E) Adapted with permission from ref176. Copyright 2020 Oxford University Press under Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. (F,G) Adapted with permission from ref 185. Copyright 2020 Philipp Kukura.
Chemical Reviews pubs.acs.org/CR Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.1c00271
Chem. Rev. XXXX, XXX, XXX −XXX
N


===== PDF PAGE 15 =====

bioanalytics, at least an order of magnitude improvement in
measurement precision at the single molecule level was required.
One method to achieve this involves further attenuation of the
reference light relative to the scattering signal by exploiting the
geometric separation of the two ﬁelds, as described in section 2.
The placement of a partially re ﬂective metallic ﬁlm of speci ﬁed
dimensions in the BFP of the microscope objective selectively
ﬁlters its NA and increases the scattering contrast (Figure 10A−
D).
43−45 Again, this does not lead to an improved shot-noise-
limited SNR, due to the concomitant reduction in total detected
photoelectrons. However, two signi ﬁcant advantages arise from
such NA ﬁltering. First, the increased contrast of the substrate
surface enables facile and accurate determination of the
optimum focus position, which is essential for accurate contrast
measurement because of the importance of the phase di ﬀerence
between scattered and re ﬂected light. The second advantage is
the ability to use high illumination powers without saturating the
imaging detector. However, with the increased contrast
provided by the partial re ﬂector, sensitivity to non-Poissonian
image perturbations also increases. This is particularly relevant
because visualization of single-molecule events require sub-
traction of the high-contrast, static, speckle-like pattern
generated by the surface of a typical glass coverslip ( Figure
10D). The increased need for sample stage stability and overall
suppression of low-frequency environmental noise resulted in
the evolution of a robustly enclosed mass photometer from
previous, optical-table-based iSCAT microscopes.
34
Recent developments in the Piliarik group expanded the
general principle of introducing a spatial ﬁlter beyond static ﬁeld
attenuation or phase retardation. 169 Replacing the thin metal
ﬁlm disk with a layer of GNRs, the purpose of the spatial ﬁlter
was not solely to attenuate the reference ﬁeld but also to change
its phase. By sandwiching a layer of thermo-optic material,
namely liquid glycerol, between the gold-coated glass substrate
and a sapphire heat sink ( Figure 10E), the local refractive index
of the glycerol can be rapidly altered by microscopic heating
(Figure 10F), which in turn results in a phase retardation of the
transmitted optical wave ( Figure 10 G). The refractive index
control, spatially con ﬁned to the cross-section of the photo-
thermal spatial light modulator (PT-SLM), allows the phase
oﬀset between the reference and scattered ﬁeld to be modulated
with a switching time of 70 μs, a factor of 100 faster than
conventional liquid crystal SLM devices. This novel device,
incorporated into an iSCAT optical setup, was shown to enable
quantitative phase imaging measurements of 3D nanoscopic
microtubule displacement.
The application of NA ﬁltering in combination with
improvements in the hardware and data analysis led to rapid
advancements in the detection sensitivity, precision, and
ultimately mass resolution of single-molecule mass measure-
ments.
34 The contrast distributions from a sample of bovine
serum albumin (BSA) molecules (66 kDa) now exhibited well-
resolved (19 kDa full width at half-maximum (FWHM)),
equally spaced peaks as expected for di ﬀerent oligomeric states
of the same protein measured using a method sensitive to
complex mass (Figure 11A). In addition, mass measurement of a
wide range of single protein molecules was possible with up to
2% sequence mass accuracy. This level of accuracy was a
desirable aspect of mass photometry (MP) because it
dramatically simpli ﬁes the identi ﬁcation of unlabeled species
by mass, enabling more highly multiplexed detection than is
possible with ﬂuorescence labeling. While the lower detection
limit of MP ( ∼40 kDa)
170 is limited by the noise sources
discussed previously, the upper limit is dictated by a number of
factors. The linear relationship between iSCAT contrast and
mass relies on the assumption that the amplitude of the scattered
ﬁeld is negligible when compared to the reference ﬁeld, which
can be somewhat alleviated by altering the degree of reference
ﬁeld attenuation. In addition to this, as the physical size of the
particle exceeds the limits of Rayleigh scattering ( ∼10% of the
illumination wavelength) and beyond, both the emission pro ﬁle
and relative phase of its scattered ﬁeld will begin to deviate from
that of a single molecule. However, in the context of single
proteins and other similarly sized biomolecules, given an
appropriate mass standard, there is no intrinsic upper limit to
MP quantiﬁcation.
While it is important to note that the current capabilities of
MP cannot match those attainable by native MS, the ability to
separate di ﬀerent oligomeric states, as well as free and bound
complexes as a result of the high single-molecule measurement
precision, in combination with label-free detection, single-
molecule sensitivity, mass measurement, solution operation, and
concentration measurement by molecular counting has resulted
in signiﬁcant adoption of MP since its inception. This includes
application to nucleic acids (Figure 11D,E), membrane proteins
(Figure 11 F,G), and membrane associated pro-
teins.
34,159,171−198 The study of membrane proteins in particular
presents an experimental challenge due to the instability of their
hydrophobic transmembrane regions in aqueous solution. In the
ﬁrst study applying MP to study membrane proteins, the authors
studied both amphipathic vehicles and lipid nanodiscs in order
to characterize the particle size, sample purity, and heterogeneity
of integral membrane proteins, in addition to identifying their
functional states.
185 MP was applied to imaging di ﬀerent
oligomeric states of Escherichia coli bo3 oxidase isolated from
lauryl maltose-neo-pentyl glycol detergent micelles ( Figure
11G). In addition, the authors studied di ﬀerent ratios of
Escherichia coli outer membrane protein (OmpF) trimers
solubilized in amphipols (Apols) ( Figure 11F).
The speed, sensitivity, and relative simplicity of a typical
experiment mean that MP lends itself naturally to sample
characterization for more structure-speci ﬁc analytical techni-
ques such as cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) and X-ray
crystallography.
194 A recent study demonstrated this by using
MP to quantify the heterogeneity of macromolecular complexes.
The results obtained were comparable to those gathered from
corresponding negative stain EM work ﬂows. Similarly, the
ability of MP to count individual molecules can be used to
accurately determine the relative abundances of di ﬀerent
biomolecular complexes in solution, thus yielding information
on the associated binding a ﬃ nities and interaction ki-
netics.
188,195,196
4.5. Interferometric Re ﬂectance Imaging Sensor
Interferometric re ﬂectance imaging sensor (IRIS) is an
experimental technique combining interferometric imaging
principles with a specialized substrate to act as an e ﬀective
biosensor. In IRIS, the substrate is fabricated from a silicon wafer
covered by a thermally grown layer of silicon dioxide, which can
be coated with antibodies to facilitate selective binding of a
species of interest.
199 Initially, the technique was designed to
detect ensemble binding of biomolecules to a surface by
measuring the thickness of the accumulated layer of biomass.
200
Subsequently, the technique demonstrated the ability to detect
and image single particles, in a modality termed single particle
Chemical Reviews pubs.acs.org/CR Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.1c00271
Chem. Rev. XXXX, XXX, XXX −XXX
O


===== PDF PAGE 16 =====

interferometric reﬂectance imaging sensor (SP-IRIS), 201 which
is the focus of this section.
In SP-IRIS, the SiO 2/Si substrate is imaged using a wide ﬁeld
reﬂection microscope containing a beamsplitter and a light-
emitting diode (LED) illumination source ( Figure 12 A).201
LED illumination provides a simple method to suppress
coherent image artifacts, such as speckles. The reference ﬁeld
is generated from the light reﬂected by the IRIS substrate, hence
the phase diﬀerence between the scattered and re ﬂected ﬁeld is
optimized by tailoring the thickness of the SiO 2 layer.202 In
addition, the IRIS substrate increases the collection eﬃ ciency of
the scattered light from a nanoparticle when compared to that of
a transparent substrate by re ﬂecting some of the forward
scattered light from the particle. In the original working mode of
SP-IRIS developed by Ünlüand co-workers, nanoparticles were
immobilized on the substrate surface before being imaged with a
high-NA air objective lens. Proof of principle experiments
demonstrated the ability of SP-IRIS to detect and characterize
the size of polystyrene beads immobilized on the substrate
surface, ranging from 70 to 200 nm in diameter, and H1N1
inﬂuenza virus particles ranging from 90 to 160 nm in diameter
(Figure 12B,C).
Building on this initial work, the application of SP-IRIS was
extended to multiplexed detection of di ﬀerent viruses in
complex media.
204 The IRIS chip was coated with a nonfouling
copolymer functionalized with an array of multiple di ﬀerent
monoclonal antibodies, which selectively bind to di ﬀerent virus
surface glycoproteins. In this study, the SP-IRIS chips were
incubated in the sample and were washed and dried before being
imaged. The authors demonstrated that the technique was
capable of detecting virus particles in both blood and fetal
bovine serum (FBS). In addition, SP-IRIS was able to
diﬀerentiate between multiple vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV)
based virions in a mixed sample due to the size variations
between di ﬀerent species. This capability was developed by
Connor and co-workers, who used two LED illumination
wavelengths to detect virus particles over a range of 40 to ∼400
nm in diameter.
205 A similar approach was used to detect
exosomes by functionalizing the surface of the IRIS chip with a
microarray of antibodies which selectively bind to exosomal
biomarkers.
206 The technique was applied to detect exosomes
with diameters >50 nm from puri ﬁed samples and undiluted
human cerebrospinal ﬂuid.
SP-IRIS transitioned from operating in air to operating in
buﬀer, enabling real-time measurements. 207 To overcome the
reduced signal when operating in bu ﬀer, image processing
techniques and a higher-NA air objective lens were introduced,
along with optimization of the SiO
2 thickness for these
conditions. In this implementation, SP-IRIS demonstrated
real-time detection of an Ebola model virus binding to an
antibody-microarray coated IRIS chip in FBS with a detection
limit of 100 PFU/mL. In the experiments presented, the
temporal resolution of the technique was 30 s, which was
adequate due to the low binding frequency of the viruses at the
concentrations of interest. For measurement at higher
concentrations, the temporal resolution could be improved
through the use of a faster camera. This concept was extended by
Scherr et al., who developed a disposable cartridge suitable for
use with infectious samples, enabling SP-IRIS to act as a
potential point-of-need diagnostic technique.
208 Moreover, the
capture eﬃ ciency of virus particles in SP-IRIS was improved by
incorporating advanced surface functionalization techniques
and assay development, yielding a limit of detection down to 43
PFU/mL.
209,210
SP-IRIS has undergone multiple recent technological
developments. First, a number of strategies capable of analyzing
stacks of defocused SP-IRIS images were developed, which
improves the visibility of nanoparticles in SP-IRIS im-
ages.
211−213 Moreover, SP-IRIS adopted a similar approach to
diﬀerential phase contrast 214 and Fourier ptychographic
microscopy81,215 by combining asymmetric illumination with
computational reconstruction to improve the spatial resolution
of the acquired images.
216 The technique was applied to imaging
an Ebola model virus immobilized on an SP-IRIS chip surface in
air with a spatial resolution of ∼150 nm, demonstrating a factor
of 2 improvement over standard SP-IRIS.
In addition to the label-free imaging applications described
above, SP-IRIS measurements have also included scattering
labels. In a demonstration of this concept, β-lactoglobulin
proteins were detected by combining SP-IRIS with antibody-
functionalized 40 nm GNPs.
217 Antibody-functionalized SP-
IRIS chips were incubated with media spiked with β-
Figure 12. Single-particle interferometric re ﬂectance imaging sensor (SP-IRIS). (A) Schematic illustrating the experimental con ﬁguration: OBJ,
objective; BS, beamsplitter. (B) Image of H1N1 virus particles immobilized on an SP-IRIS chip. (C) Histogram of the measured H1N1 virus
diameters. (D) Composite image of an SP-IRIS microarray. Inset: normalized image intensity image of 25 nm× 71 nm GNRs bound to the surface of a
microarray spot. (E) Plot of GNR counts against the concentration of HBsAg. (B,C) Adapted with permission from ref201. Copyright 2010 American
Chemical Society. (D,E) Adapted with permission from ref 203. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.
Chemical Reviews pubs.acs.org/CR Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.1c00271
Chem. Rev. XXXX, XXX, XXX −XXX
P


===== PDF PAGE 17 =====

lactoglobulin, enabling the protein to bind to the chip. Following
this step, the chip was incubated with antibody-functionalized
40 nm GNPs, enabling the GNP labeled protein complex to be
detected using SP-IRIS. The calculated limit of detection of the
technique was ∼60 aM in undiluted serum and ∼500 aM in
unprocessed blood. Furthermore, SP-IRIS used GNR labeling to
detect and count viruses over a large FOV.
203 As GNRs scatter
light which is linearly polarized along their longitudinal axis,37,76
the authors used circularly polarized illumination in combina-
tion with polarization optics in the detection to selectively
attenuate the re ﬂected ﬁeld relative to the scattered ﬁeld. This
enabled the detection of 25 nm × 71 nm GNRs while using a
low-NA, low-magni ﬁcation objective lens with a FOV of 1.46
mm2, which enabled tens of GNR-containing microarray spots
to be imaged simultaneously ( Figure 12 D). Because of the
relationship between the orientation of the GNR and the
retardation of the scattered ﬁeld imposed by the polarization
optics in the detection, a z stack of images was acquired and
processed so that GNRs of all orientation angles were detected.
This modality of SP-IRIS was used to detect hepatitis B surface
antigen (HBsAg) in bu ﬀer, using 15 nm × 40 nm GNRs as
scattering labels. Similar to the study outlined above, an
antibody-microarray coated SP-IRIS chip was incubated with
HBsAg, followed by incubation with antibody-functionalized
GNRs. After these steps, the SP-IRIS chip was imaged in air to
quantify the amount of GNR-labeled HBsAg bound to the
antibody-microarray coated IRIS chip (Figure 12E). Combining
single particle counting and inferring the number of nanorods
within an unresolvable distance by analyzing the intensity of the
signal, the sensor was capable of operating over a dynamic range
of ∼1 × 10
6, with a limit of detection of 3.2. pg/mL. This work
was extended to dynamic measurements by using a custom
perfusion chamber and a higher-NA objective, sacri ﬁcing the
size of the FOV in exchange for higher collection e ﬃ ciency of
scattered light.
218 In addition, an analysis scheme which tracked
each binding event over time was developed so that the rate of
binding and unbinding in a sample could be determined.
4.6. Coherent Bright ﬁeld Imaging
In coherent brightﬁeld imaging (COBRI), the interference takes
place between forward scattered light from the object of interest
and the transmitted illumination light. COBRI was introduced
by Hsieh and co-workers, who showcased the method by label-
free imaging and tracking of vaccinia virus particles (∼250 nm in
diameter) diﬀusing on a cell plasma membrane, at a frame rate of
up to 100 kHz and a spatial precision of <3 nm ( Figure 13B−
E).219 The authors demonstrated that the method is capable of
three-dimensional tracking as the axial position of the object can
be retrieved by analyzing the PSF due to the variation in the
phase di ﬀerence between scattered and transmitted light ﬁelds
with the axial position of the scatterer. COBRI exhibits a single
contrast inversion as the object of interest is translated through
the focus, making axial tracking particularly intuitive and
straightforward ( Figure 13 C). To track virus particles with
high localization precision in the presence of scattering
background from the cell membrane, the authors employed a
digital background removal procedure. The experimental setup
used a pair of AODs to scan a spatially ﬁltered laser beam across
the sample to generate an even illumination proﬁle. The original
experimental design of COBRI incorporated a 60 mm focal
length lens to focus the illumination onto the sample, although
this was later replaced by a water-dipping objective lens ( Figure
13A).220
COBRI microscopy was further used to study intracellular
cargo transport by imaging and tracking cellular vesicles in three
dimensions inside live ﬁbroblast cells at a frame rate of 30
kHz.221 Because of the sensitivity limit of the particular setup
used, vesicles below 150 nm in diameter could not be observed
and hence the study focused on larger vesicles, with a mean
diameter of ∼320 nm. Because of the high temporal resolution
and long observation times enabled by the technique, transient
bidirectional motion of the vesicles inside the cells were
observed. In addition, correlated motion was observed by
simultaneously tracking two adjacent vesicles. COBRI is
particularly well-suited for tracking objects within cells, as the
technique does not detect re ﬂections from interfaces within the
sample, such as a cell membrane.
Figure 13. Coherent bright ﬁeld microscopy. (A) Schematic illustrating the experimental con ﬁguration. OBJ1, water-dipping objective; OBJ2, oil-
immersion objective. (B) Image of vaccinia virus particles immobilized on a glass coverslip. (C) Image of a vaccinia virus particle as a function of ax ial
sample position. (D) 3D localization of a tracked vaccinia virus particle immobilized on a glass coverslip at a frame rate of 5 kHz. (E) 3D trace of a virus
particle landing and diﬀusing on a cell plasma membrane at an acquisition rate of 5 kHz. (B−E) Adapted with permission from ref219. Copyright 2017
American Chemical Society.
Chemical Reviews pubs.acs.org/CR Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.1c00271
Chem. Rev. XXXX, XXX, XXX −XXX
Q


===== PDF PAGE 18 =====

Recently, the sensitivity of COBRI was improved so that
GNPs of diameters down to 10 nm could be imaged and tracked
in water.
220 The gain in sensitivity was obtained by employing
the reference ﬁeld attenuation approach discussed in section
4.4.43−45 As a proof of principle, a lipid labeled with a 10 nm
GNP was tracked while di ﬀusing on a supported lipid bilayer
with an acquisition rate of 1 kHz and localization precision of 10
nm. In addition, the authors built a combined iSCAT-COBRI
microscope to enable a quantitative comparison between the
two techniques using the same detection line, image processing,
and experimental parameters. To obtain a comparable level of
camera counts with the same illumination intensity, the
transmissivity of the partial re ﬂector was tailored for each
technique. It was determined that the sensitivity of the
techniques are identical for equal illumination intensity, as
expected from eq 7.
5. PLASMONIC IMAGING
5.1. Introduction
Many bioanalytical technologies leverage surface plasmon
resonance (SPR) to amplify the evanescent electric ﬁeld at the
sample−substrate interface, thus enhancing the detected signal
emanating from an analyte molecule in the far- ﬁeld. SPR
spectroscopy has been used in biosensing since 1983,222 with the
ﬁrst biosensor based on the optical excitation of surface
plasmons demonstrated in the early 1990s by Lundstrom et al.
Modern SPR biosensors enable highly sensitive, often label-free
investigation of the interaction between biomolecules, such as
proteins
223−230 and nucleic acids, 231−239 with multiple reviews
having documented the expansion of the ﬁeld in great
detail.240−246 The majority of these approaches are ensemble-
based, integrating the signal from multiple interactions in a
macroscopic area so they fail to resolve the range of stochastic
behavior present in a population of biomolecules. Recent
developments have thus attempted to combine the information
available from ensemble-based spectroscopic detection with
high-resolution optical microscopy in an attempt to reach single-
molecule sensitivity by SPR microscopy (SPRM).
Surface plasmon resonance refers to the collective oscillation
of free conduction electrons near the interface of two media with
dielectric constants of opposite signs, for example, a metal and a
dielectric. The associated electromagnetic ﬁeld is localized to
this interface and decays into both media. SPR spectroscopy
measures changes in the optical re ﬂectivity of the interface
between these two media, which result from changes in the local
refractive index caused by target species entering or leaving the
evanescent ﬁeld. The sensitivity of the measurement to small
changes in the local refractive index is enhanced by the excitation
of surface plasmon polaritons (SPP); charge density waves
formed at, and propagating along, the interface between a metal
and a dielectric medium. Excitation of SPPs on a continuous
metallic ﬁlm (typically silver or gold) with incident light requires
matching the respective wave vectors. This can be achieved by
tuning the angle of incidence of illumination. Consequently, as
the illumination angle approaches the resonance angle,
excitation of SPPs results in a sudden and sharp attenuation of
the re ﬂected light intensity. The resonance angle that leads to
this intensity dip is therefore highly sensitive to the e ﬀective
refractive index ( n
eff), the weighted average of the index of
refraction of any materials within the evanescent ﬁeld (∼300 nm
from the metal surface), such as liquids and absorbates. 247
A typical SPR instrument excites surface plasmon modes on
unstructured metal ﬁlms by attenuated total re ﬂection (ATR),
passing a p-polarized monochromatic light beam through a
prism, which is optically attached to a gold-coated glass slide.
The reﬂected light intensity can then be quantiﬁed as a function
of wavelength, at a ﬁxed angle of illumination, or versus
illumination angle for a range of wavelengths. The ﬁrst
demonstrations of spatially resolved plasmonic measurements
were published in the 1980s by Yeatman and Ash
248 and
Rothenhausler and Knoll. 249 Initial developments simply
replaced the detector in an SPR spectroscopy setup, typically a
photodiode, with a digital camera to obtain a two-dimensional
image of the local refractive index change on the surface of a thin
gold ﬁlm. This technique is commonly known as SPR imaging
(SPRI) or two-dimensional SPR (2D-SPR). Prism-based SPRI
platforms provide su ﬃ cient spatial resolution to quantify the
optical response of multiple cells independently
250 and, as a
result, they provide a useful tool for several high-throughput and
multiplexed analyses in biological research and drug discovery
applications.
251−255 The spatial resolution achievable when a
prism is used to collect the detected light, however, is limited.
Replacing the prism with a high-NA objective lens greatly
enhances the achievable spatial resolution to that of a wide- ﬁeld
microscope, thus facilitating SPRM.
256
Figure 14. Surface plasmon resonance microscopy. (A) Schematic of a typical SPRM optical setup. OBJ, objective; BS, beamsplitter; L, tube lens; C,
camera. (B) An example of a SPRM PSF with the arrow indicating the direction of surface plasmon propagation. (C) Near- ﬁeld light −matter
interaction of SPRM illumination. Ei incident ﬁeld, Es scattered ﬁeld, Er reﬂected ﬁeld, Esp evanescent ﬁeld, θR resonant angle. (B) Adapted with
permission from ref 259. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.
Chemical Reviews pubs.acs.org/CR Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.1c00271
Chem. Rev. XXXX, XXX, XXX −XXX
R


===== PDF PAGE 19 =====

In this section, we will focus on recent developments in
objective-based plasmonic imaging, particularly those which
leverage SPR on continuous metallic ﬁlms to enhance the signal
and elevate plasmonic imaging toward single-molecule detection
sensitivity.
5.2. Surface Plasmon Resonance Microscopy
A typical SPRM optical system focuses a beam of p-polarized
monochromatic light into the BFP of a high-NA oil-immersion
objective, producing plane-wave illumination of a gold-coated
glass coverslip, again based on the ATR method, akin to the
Kretschmann con ﬁguration.
257 Lateral o ﬀset of the focused
beam away from the optical axis of the BFP,d, alters the incident
illumination angle, θ, while radial translation changes the
azimuthal illumination angle and therefore the direction of SPP
propagation. Given the focal length of the objective lens, f, the
incident angle of illumination can be determined from eq 9:
θ=df sin (9)
Because of imperfect alignment and aberrations in the objective,
however, a Fresnel-based optical model may not produce
accurate results, thus a calibration measurement may be
required. Modulation of the incident illumination angle
determines the proportion of light re ﬂected o ﬀ of the gold −
medium interface and collected by the objective before being
imaged onto a CCD camera with a tube lens ( Figure 14A). The
reﬂected light intensity is strongly attenuated upon excitation of
the surface plasmon. Wave vector matching of the incident light
to that of the surface plasmon can be achieved by illuminating
the metal/dielectric interface at the resonance angle or SPR
angle, θ
R, given by 258
θ εε
εε ε= +sin( ) ()R
1m
1m 2 (10)
where ε1 and ε2 are the dielectric constants of the dielectric
medium (typically a bu ﬀer solution) and the objective lens,
respectively, and εm is the real part of the dielectric constant of
the metal ﬁlm. This equation is valid if the immersion medium
and objective lens refractive index are matched. Small refractive
index variations in the evanescent ﬁeld at the interface alter the
resonance angle. A practical implication of eqs 9 and 10 is the
challenge associated with illuminating a sample at the resonance
angle. For example, θ
R = 71.6 ° for a 50 nm thick gold ﬁlm
illuminated with λ = 638 nm light at a water interface256 and, as a
result, objectives with NA > 1.4 are required. In addition, as θR
for gold and silver ﬁlms typically increases as λ decreases in the
visible spectrum, illumination is generally restricted to red light
in SPRM experiments, as higher index materials would be
required to achieve θ
i = θR at shorter wavelengths.
For a uniform surface, measuring the change in re ﬂected light
intensity at a ﬁxed incident angle of illumination enables the
change in the e ﬀective refractive index of the interface to be
determined. This is the basic principle of SPR spectroscopy.
Resolving discrete local refractive index di ﬀerences caused by
the presence of a nano-object near the surface, however, requires
a deviation from the classical model. This heterogeneity in the
complex dielectric generates the contrast of an SPRM image.
The incident p-polarized light at the substrate/metal interface is
partially re ﬂected and absorbed, exciting the surface plasmon
wave and resulting in two ﬁelds: the re ﬂected ﬁeld, E
r, and the
ﬁeld associated with the surface plasmon, Esp. The propagating
surface plasmon wave is scattered by any dielectric discontinuity,
such as an object near the metal surface, producing a scattered
ﬁeld, E
s (Figure 14C). The light intensity detected at any given
point in an SPR image, ISPR, is given by a superposition of the
reﬂected, scattered, and surface plasmon ﬁelds, radiated in the
direction of re ﬂection:260
=| + + |
=| + | +| | + { * + * }
I EE E
EE E R e E EE 2( )
SPR r sp s
2
sp r
2
s
2
ss p r (11)
The ﬁrst term in eq 11 describes a uniform SPR background in
the absence of a particle. The second term in the expression is a
pure scattering contribution, which is negligible for particles
much smaller than the illumination wavelength. The complex
third term describes the interferometric contribution between
the scattering ﬁeld and the surface plasmon, which can be
expressed as an exponentially decaying cylindrical wave and
gives rise to a parabolic“tail” pattern of fringes at the image plane
(Figure 14B).
261−263
Excitation of surface plasmon modes propagating across a
continuous metallic surface produces an electric ﬁeld exhibiting
a characteristic propagation length ( ∼101 μm) and penetration
depth ( ∼102 nm). While this is the most commonly excited
surface plasmon mode in SPRM experiments, these properties
can be manipulated using conductive-dielectric multilayers,
264
exciting localized surface plasmons (LSP) supported by a single
nanoparticle,
265−268 or by manufacturing arrays of plasmonic
nanoparticles269,270 or nanoapertures271−273 on a metallic ﬁlm.
There have been many optical platform developments in the
ﬁeld of spectral SPR imaging and biosensing, with nonresonant
detection sensitivities reaching the single molecule level in two
independent studies in 2012. Zijlstra et al. employed a sensitive
photothermal assay to monitor the SPR of a gold nanorod upon
binding of single proteins, producing results which exhibited a
700-fold increase in sensitivity over alternative, state-of-the-art
plasmon biosensors at the time.
267 In a di ﬀerent approach,
Ament et al. illuminated a gold nanorod with a white light laser
in TIR and employed a dark ﬁeld spectroscopy detection
modality; this allowed them to resolve the discrete steps in the
SPR wavelength caused by single protein binding events on the
millisecond time scale.
268 These pioneering developments, as
well as many other studies which leverage plasmon sensor
technologies, have been covered in other reviews.
241,274−276 For
this review, we will focus on recent developments in objective-
based SPRM setups based on the excitation of propagating SPs
on continuous metallic ﬁlms.
The PSF of an SPRM microscope is distorted by the
propagating SPP, and thus its orientation is ultimately dictated
by the incident (polar) angle of illumination ( Figure 14 B).
Spatial resolution is di ﬀraction limited in the direction
transverse to SPP propagation, while extending over the
propagation length of the SPP in the longitudinal direction,
typically several micrometers. Tao and co-workers were the ﬁrst
to observe this pattern,
277 and subsequently proposed a
theoretical model to describe the interaction between a
propagating SPP and an isolated nano-object.
260 Several
theoretical models have als o attempted to describe this
interaction and its role in the formation of a plasmonic
image.278 Quantitative analysis of the wave-like PSF, however,
has been challenging due to its geometric complexity despite
these complex interferometric scattering patterns containing
information regarding the properties of the associated nano-
particle. The summed signal intensity over a region of interest
(ROI) selected from a PSF can be used to identify both the size
of a nanoparticle and its distance from the metal ﬁlm. The
Chemical Reviews pubs.acs.org/CR Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.1c00271
Chem. Rev. XXXX, XXX, XXX −XXX
S


===== PDF PAGE 20 =====

refractive index, and therefore the nanoparticle material,
however, cannot be accurately determined by this method.
Quantitative interpretations in the frequency domain have
further developed the general understanding and analysis of the
SPRM PSF.
259 The interferometric pattern partly consists of
light scattered from the imaged nanoparticle, hence it must
depend on parameters such as the refractive index as well as the
size of the nanoparticle. Quantitative analysis of this pattern was
achieved, both numerically and experimentally, by implement-
ing a parameter, ψ, which describes the phase of the parabolic
patterns leading to the elucidation of the relationship between
the refractive index of the nanoparticle and its associated
pattern.
279
The detection of scattered light of a propagating evanescent
wave limits the spatial resolution of SPRM. However, the
conﬁnement of the surface plasmon to the metal/dielectric
interface provides SPRM with extremely high axial sensitivity.
The rapidly decaying evanescent ﬁeld results in an exponential
relationship between SPR signal intensity and the axial distance
between a particle and the interface. If the decay constant of the
SPRM system is known, this relationship can be quanti ﬁed with
a precision of ∼5 nm in the z-direction.
280
5.3. Biomolecular Imaging and Detection
Despite its anisotropic PSF, SPRM has been employed to
directly image and study both synthetic nanoparticles and
biomolecules. The excitation of a propagating SPP ampli ﬁes the
local electric ﬁeld and is scattered by any dielectric discontinuity
in its path while also attenuating the amount of light re ﬂected
from the surface. Both of these e ﬀects contribute toward
enhanced interferometric contrast in the far ﬁeld. Furthermore,
the conﬁnement of the evanescent ﬁeld to within approximately
200−300 nm of the gold−medium interface rejects background
scattering from out-of-focus particles, much like in the
approaches discussed in section 3. Tao and co-workers leveraged
this eﬀect to image single H1N1 in ﬂuenza A virus particles and
monitor their interaction on di ﬀerent surfaces (Figure 15A).
277
The multiplexing capabilities of SPRM enabled high-throughput
analysis of several individual virus particles. By ﬁtting the SPRM
signal from diﬀerently sized silica nanoparticles ( Figure 15B), a
proportional relationship was veriﬁed between the volume of the
particles and the interferometric signal ( Figure 15C). By way of
this calibration process, and by approximating the refractive
index of viral particles as ∼1.48 due to their protein −lipid
composition, the volume and diameter of inﬂuenza A was found
to be 6.8 ± 3.0 × 10
−4 μm3 and 109 ± 13 nm, respectively, in
good agreement with literature values.
The imaging capability enabled by a high-NA objective
provides SPRM with single-molecule sensitivity, ﬁrst demon-
strated by Yu et al. in 2014. 281 By implementing di ﬀerential
imaging coupled with lateral translation of the image and a
deconvolution algorithm, single DNA molecules were imaged.
These images were used to measure the length of individual
stretched λ-DNA molecules to determine an average length of
∼14.6 μm, in good agreement with ﬂuorescence images and
theoretical models. Applications of SPRM to study larger
biological structures, such as single-bacterium motion classi-
ﬁcation
282 and visualization of cellular activity and morphol-
ogy,283−285 further demonstrate the versatility of the technique,
but such applications are mostly beyond the scope of this
review.
286 It is worth noting that the extension of the electric
ﬁeld penetration depth toward cellular length-scales ( ∼1 μm)
can be achieved by depositing a bu ﬀer layer with a refractive
index similar to that of the sample between the substrate and the
metal ﬁlm.
264 This technique, called long-range surface plasmon
resonance (LRSPR), has recently been incorporated into an
SPRM setup to study cellular micromotion.
285
The sensitivity of a SPRM measurement is determined by its
ability to detect small variations in the refractive index, which are
proportional to the volume of the analyte molecule. Con-
sequently, quantitative detection of small-molecule binding
events is a challenge for a conventional SPRM system. In an
Figure 15. SPRM detection of single virus particles. (A) SPRM images of H1N1 inﬂuenza A virus and three diﬀerent-sized silica nanoparticles in PBS
buﬀer. (B) Histograms of SPR intensities of silica nanoparticles of di ﬀerent diameters and of inﬂuenza A viral particles. (C) Calibration curve of SPR
intensity vs particle volume. (A −C) Adapted with permission from ref 277. Copyright 2010 National Academy of Sciences.
Chemical Reviews pubs.acs.org/CR Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.1c00271
Chem. Rev. XXXX, XXX, XXX −XXX
T


===== PDF PAGE 21 =====

alternative approach, plasmonic-based electrochemical impe-
dance microscopy (P-EIM) employs an SPRM optical setup to
image the electrochemical impedance distribution across the
surface while simultaneously measuring the SPR response. 287
Instead of measuring changes in current directly, P-EIM uses the
gold surface as an electrode and converts local surface charge
variations, which result from the modulation of an applied
external ﬁeld, into an optical signal. In comparison to SPRM, P-
EIM yields improved image contrast and greater sensitivity
when detecting small molecules. P-EIM measures interfacial
impedance rather than refractive index changes, therefore the
measured signal does not scale with the mass of the analyte
molecule. The superior sensitivity, coupled with submicrometer
spatial resolution and submillisecond temporal resolution,
makes P-EIM a powerful approach for small-molecule detection
and quantitative investigation of protein binding kinetics, as well
as a variety of other applications.
288−290
The labeling of biomolecules with GNPs can also enhance the
detected optical response, as has been shown in multiple SPR
biosensor studies. Used in conjunction with SPRM, Halpern et
al. demonstrated real-time detection of hybridization adsorption
of single DNA-functionalized GNPs.
291 A novel method to
improve the detection capabilities of SPRM toward small-
molecule detection combines the axial sensitivity of SPRM with
the signal ampli ﬁcation provided by GNPs and the detection
sensitivity of P-EIM. Here, GNPs are bound to a gold electrode
with a molecular tether and an oscillating electric ﬁeld is applied
normal to the electrode surface, causing the GNPs to oscillate in
the z direction. The plasmonic signal from the nano-oscillators is
extremely sensitive to the amplitude of their oscillation, such
that the z position of each nano-oscillator can be determined
with a precision of ∼0.1 nm.
292 From the measured amplitude
and phase of the oscillation, the charge of each nano-oscillator
can be determined with a detection limit of ∼0.18 electron
charges in aqueous solution. This sensitivity to nano-oscillator
charge, which is altered by the binding of small molecules, was
further employed to monitor phosphorylation kinetics.
293 An
adaptation of this approach used light to drive the nano-
oscillators rather than an external electrical current. 294
Mechanoresponsive polymers self-assemble on the gold surface
and act as both a tether and a motor for the GNPs, as they extend
and collapse under periodic photothermal generation. To
monitor single-strand microRNA (miRNA), the complemen-
tary strand is immobilized in the gap between the GNP and the
gold surface, and as the two hybridize to form a rigid double-
stranded structure, the oscillation amplitude of the GNP is
damped. Using the time trace of the damping signal, real-time
monitoring of single-molecule miRNA hybridization can be
achieved.
Unlike traditional localized SPR (LSPR) methods, the
implementation of nano-oscillators as signal-enhancing devices
is not limited to metallic nanoparticles. A recent study has
applied the general principles of nano-oscillator SPRM but
replaced the GNP antenna with single proteins and the
plasmonic surface with a layer of indium tin oxide (ITO)
(Figure 16 A).
295 An alternating electric ﬁeld is applied to the
ITO surface, driving the oscillation of the tethered protein
molecules. With an SPRM optical setup, the surface is
illuminated at an oblique angle which produces an evanescent
wave, the incident light is scattered by the protein and collected
by a high-NA objective, and an image sequence is recorded on a
CMOS camera. A fast Fourier transform (FFT) is performed on
the image sequence to isolate the oscillation frequency of the
applied ﬁeld and extract the oscillation amplitude while rejecting
Figure 16. SPRM imaging of protein size, charge, and mobility. (A) Schematic showing a single protein tethered to an ITO surface by a 63 nm long
polyethylene glycol (PEG) linker. (B) FFT image contrast as a function of potential amplitude and a schematic displaying this relation to PEG tether
extension; scale bar = 3 μm. The blue dashed line indicates linear and plateau regimes of tether extension. (C) Size determination of protein −PEG
complexes (DH) as a function of FFT image contrast change ( ΔC). (D) 2D plot of mobility ( μ) vs size ( DH) of single proteins and protein −ligand
complexes. (A−D) Adapted with permission from ref 295. Copyright 2020 Springer Nature under Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International
License https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0.
Chemical Reviews pubs.acs.org/CR Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.1c00271
Chem. Rev. XXXX, XXX, XXX −XXX
U


===== PDF PAGE 22 =====

background noise ( Figure 16 B). The resulting signal has been
used to estimate the size ( Figure 16 C), charge, mobility, and
conformation of the tethered protein. This data was then used to
produce a two-dimensional plot of mobility vs size for various
single proteins and protein −ligand complexes ( Figure 16D).
5.4. Resolution-enhanced Surface Plasmon Resonance
Microscopy
Although imaging of single molecules is possible with conven-
tional SPRM, the complex, wave-like PSF signi ﬁcantly restricts
spatial resolution and sensitivity. Attempts have been made to
reconstruct a pseudospherical scattering wavefront and thus a
symmetric PSF, both optically and computationally.
One approach to improve the spatial resolution is to use light
with a shorter wavelength (e.g., λ = 532 nm for Au) to excite the
surface plasmons, although this sacriﬁces sensitivity as the SPR is
less well-deﬁned.
256 Lateral raster scanning of a focused probe
beam across the surface, in a technique known as scanning
localized surface plasmon microscopy (SLSPM), has also been
shown to achieve improvements to the spatial resolution but at
the expense of temporal resolution.
296−298 The wave-like
appearance of the SPRM PSF is not entirely unique to SPRM.
As discussed in section 3.3 , illumination of a nano-object by a
plane wave incident at an oblique polar angle produces a
similarly anisotropic PSF, with tail-like fringe patterns, as the
spherical scattered wave and reﬂected plane wave have a spatially
inhomogeneous phase o ﬀset.
Using conventional bright ﬁeld microscopy, as discussed in
section 3.3 , Rohrbach and co-workers overcame these fringe
patterns by incoherently averaging images recorded with many
diﬀerent azimuthal angles of illumination.
85,91 A similar
azimuthal rotation illumination (ARI) approach was imple-
mented in an SPRM microscope (SPRM-ARI) (Figure 17A),
299
building upon previous attempts to optically improve the lateral
resolution in SPRM. 300−302 The characteristic tails produced
from SP scattering of a nanoparticle on a silver ﬁlm were
eﬀectively homogenized upon image averaging, resulting in a
bright, doughnut-shaped PSF ( Figure 17B). This shape can be
explained by the polarization-matched coupled emission at all
incident azimuthal angles of illumination, analogous to the PSF
for surface plasmon-coupled emission microscopy
(SPCEM).
303−305 A polarizer was inserted in front of the
camera, such that this doughnut-shaped spot was separated into
two bright spots, which can be regarded as the PSF of SPRM-
ARI. The beneﬁts of improved spatial resolution and smoothing
of interferometric fringe patterns was further illustrated by
imaging the complex shape of a winding nanowire (Figure 17C).
SPRM-ARI is said to enhance the longitudinal spatial resolution
of SPRM by an order of magnitude, and the e ﬀective temporal
resolution is only limited by the illumination rotation speed (1
ms), as opposed to the lateral movement time limitation in
diﬀerential SPR. Alternative nonmetallic ﬁlms for signal
enhancement have also been suggested and compared. Using
bespoke dielectric multilayers to produce Bloch surface waves
(BSW) instead of surface plasmons, illumination wavelength,
resonant angle, and polarization state can be tailored ( Figure
17D). While SPRM is restricted to illumination with P-polarized
light, commonly in the spectral region of 635 nm for Au ﬁlms
due to resonant angle collection, BSW microscopy (BSWM) can
operate with S-polarized light of shorter wavelengths (e.g., 532
nm) and with tunable penetration depths ( Figure 17E).
A recent study by the Tao group has modi ﬁed the traditional
SPRM method to image the scattering of SPPs in a transmission
modality, which they refer to as plasmonic scattering microscopy
(PSM).
306 In contrast to re ﬂection-based SPRM, the re ﬂected
light is not collected, and plasmonic images are produced by the
Figure 17. SPRM-ARI imaging and Bloch surface wave microscopy. (A) Schematic illustrating the superposition of the planar illumination wave,
incident at diﬀering azimuthal angles, and a circular scattered wave from a nanosphere. The bottom image shows the cumulative propagation direction
of the planar wave for azimuthal illumination angles 0−360°, similar to SPRM-ARI. (B) SPRM image of a 50 nm nanosphere on a Ag ﬁlm (left) and a
corresponding image acquired with SPRM-ARI (right). (C) Images acquired analogously to those in B but of a winding polymer nanowire. (D)
Schematic displaying the dielectric multilayer substrate used for BSWM. (E) Angle-dependent excitation spectrum where ne is the refractive index of
the environment. (A−E) Adapted with permission from ref299. Copyright 2019 American Association for the Advancement of Science under Creative
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International license https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/.
Chemical Reviews pubs.acs.org/CR Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.1c00271
Chem. Rev. XXXX, XXX, XXX −XXX
V


===== PDF PAGE 23 =====

interferometric interaction of light scattered from both the
particle and from topographical inhomogeneities of the gold
surface ( Figure 18 A). This allows for higher illumination
intensities ( ∼30 000×), provides a high-contrast image and
circumvents the complexity and limited resolution of the SPRM
PSF. Instead, the pixel intensities are integrated across the
complex Airy disk ( Figure 18 B). The enhanced sensitivity of
PSM was demonstrated by label-free imaging of single proteins.
Human immunoglobulin M (IgM) and human immunoglobulin
A (IgA) were detected upon binding to the surface (Figure 18B),
and their respective sizes were determined ( Figure 18C). This
identiﬁcation was further con ﬁrmed by distinguishing both
proteins via the speci ﬁc binding of IgA to an anti-IgA coated
surface. The latter experiment enabled the quanti ﬁcation of
single-protein binding kinetics by digital counting of individual
binding events of IgA molecules to an anti-IgA coated surface
(Figure 18 D,E). Surface coverage results, obtained by multi-
plying the binding counts detected by PSM by the molecular
mass of IgA (385 kDa), were consistent with ensemble SPR
measurements, con ﬁrming that PSM can be used to measure
protein mass. The PSM optical setup was recently modi ﬁed to
include a Kretschmann prism-coupled SPR illumination
conﬁguration, while retaining single protein sensitivity and
high spatial resolution enabled by transmission detection.
307
Computational approaches to reconstruct an isotropic SPRM
PSF, without additional temporal limitations or further
complication of the optical setup, have also been explored. 308
The image reconstruction algorithm proposed applies ﬁlters in
Fourier space to obtain the scattered ﬁeld from the measured
image, before reconstructing the object image via deconvolution
of the scattered ﬁeld with the SPRM PSF, modeled by a decaying
cylindrical wave. This process was demonstrated on 100 nm
polystyrene nanoparticles and achieved near-di ﬀraction-limited
spatial resolution in both transverse and longitudinal directions
of ∼310 nm. However, in the presence of multiple non-
negligible scattering events, a more sophisticated algorithm may
need to be applied. In another study, this digital image-
processing algorithm was employed in an optimized SPRM
setup termed interferometric plasmonic microscopy (iPM).
309
Diﬀraction-limited spatial resolution ( ∼260 nm) enabled the
real-time imaging of single exosomes adsorbing to a modiﬁed Au
surface, which was then used to determine their respective
diameters (30 −150 nm). This level of sensitivity resulted
quantitative measurements of the membrane fusion activity
between exosomes and liposomes, as well as the study of the
dynamic interaction between exosomes and antibodies.
6. SUMMARY AND OUTLOOK
In this review, we have given an overview of recent develop-
ments in dark ﬁeld, interferometric scattering, and plasmonic
microscopy in the context of nanoparticle and molecular
imaging, detection, and characterization. These three ap-
proaches have achieved signi ﬁcant increases in sensitivity, with
the latter two reaching the single (bio)molecule level under
ambient conditions. Darkﬁeld microscopy has demonstrated the
most limited sensitivity of the discussed techniques, mainly due
to the D
6 scaling of signal with particle size, which necessitates
extremely eﬃ cient background rejection and extensive dynamic
range to detect very small signals. Even in the absence of
demonstrating single-molecule sensitivity, dark ﬁeld microscopy
has been used to detect single viruses
71,112 and 10 nm GNPs42 in
studies on custom-built microscopes.
Despite the limited sensitivity of darkﬁeld microscopy relative
to interferometric scattering and plasmonic enhancement,
eﬃ cient background rejection enables much higher illumination
intensities for a given detector, allowing a signi ﬁcant portion of
the full well depth of the camera to be used for detecting
scattered photons. The combination of strong background
rejection with a theoretically unlimited photon budget enables
darkﬁeld microscopy to perform well as a single-particle tracking
Figure 18. Quantitative detection of single molecules by plasmonic scattering microscopy. (A) Schematic illustrating the detection method employed
in PSM, in which plasmonic waves scattered by a particle (Es) and any inhomogeneities on the gold surface (Eb) are gathered from the top and interfere
to produce an image at the detector. (B) Background and drift corrected PSM image of immunoglobulin M (IgM) molecules. Scale bar: 5 μm. (C)
PSM image intensity vs particle diameter. (D) Histograms displaying intensity changes associated with binding and unbinding of individual IgA
molecules. (E) Example of the binding behavior of a single IgA molecule. (B −E) Adapted with permission from ref 306. Copyright 2020 Springer
Nature.
Chemical Reviews pubs.acs.org/CR Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.1c00271
Chem. Rev. XXXX, XXX, XXX −XXX
W


===== PDF PAGE 24 =====

technique when imaging suitably sized labels due to the high
resulting signal-to-background ratios. Examples include shot-
noise-limited localization precision of ∼1 nm with 10 μs
temporal resolution when tracking 20 nm GNPs in a
micromirror TIRS setup
58 and 1.3 Å localization precision
with 1 ms temporal resolution when tracking 40 nm GNPs using
a perforated mirror TIRS setup with annular illumination. 72
A potential downside of the single-particle tracking ability of
darkﬁeld microscopy is the di ﬃ culty of applying the technique
to biological environments that exhibit high levels of back-
ground scattering. To overcome this limitation, strategies may
include improved image processing techniques and the
introduction of next-generation detectors with higher full-well
capacities. We anticipate darkﬁeld microscopy usage to continue
to focus on single-particle tracking of biologically relevant
systems using scattering labels, and expect that further
technological developments will continue to push the
boundaries of spatiotemporal resolution, enabling the analysis
of even faster and more subtle molecular motion. Beyond this
application, for dark ﬁeld microscopy to reach the sensitivity
limits achieved by interferometric imaging, developments in
image processing might be required to identify the target signal
from any unwanted background. This may be a nontrivial task,
however, as background scattering from sources near the target
particle, such as coverslip surface roughness, may interfere with
the scattered light from the particle, producing a complex signal.
Thus, the ultimate challenge for dark ﬁeld microscopy, when
attempting to observe very small scatterers such as single
molecules, is to retain a purely scattering intensity measurement
in the absence of any background, or to develop novel image
analysis approaches, which allows the interferometric inter-
action of the signal and background to be used.
Interferometric scattering microscopy has exhibited sensitiv-
ity superior to that of dark ﬁeld microscopy, largely due to the
weaker D
3 scaling of the signal with particle size and resulting
higher ease of background suppression. The boundaries have
been signi ﬁcantly pushed, from the detection of metal
nanoparticles to single proteins, through the introduction of
innovative image processing, and data analysis techniques
combined with various technological developments.
32−34,43
Signiﬁcantly improving the sensitivity of interferometric
microscopy in its current form may prove a di ﬃ cult task, as
there are limits to the incident laser power that biological
samples and optical elements can be exposed to. Strategies to
collect more light by integrating for longer in time, at the
expense of temporal resolution, would require an improved
approach to background noise subtraction, especially in the
context of lateral drift and other cumulative noise sources. This
could be achieved by developments in both the hardware, such
as substrate modi ﬁcations, or the image analysis methods.
Additionally, exploring mechanisms which enable an increase in
the light −matter interaction strength at the sample might be
worthwhile.
The ability to detect and quantify the mass of single proteins
in solution under ambient conditions is an exciting develop-
ment, with broad use across the life sciences. We anticipate the
detection limit of MP to be further improved through a range of
hardware and software developments, enabling the study of
currently inaccessible systems and more complex biomolecular
processes. iSCAT, one of the most rapidly developing
interferometric scattering approaches, has transitioned from
single-particle tracking in low scattering environments to 3D
tracking in complex environ ments, including cell mem-
branes.
136−138,140 This represents an important advance, as
tracking biomolecules within their native environments at
spatiotemporal resolutions inaccessible in ﬂuorescence micros-
copy paves the way to discover hitherto hidden dynamics. We
hypothesize that interferometric scattering microscopy develop-
ment will continue to focus on unlocking the information
contained within its complex PSF, while improvements in
sensitivity and image processing will enable the use of smaller
scattering labels and imaging at higher spatiotemporal
resolutions. In addition to pushing the boundaries of sensitivity,
we expect interferometric scattering microscopy techniques to
achieve some degree of speci ﬁcity, for example, through the
development of improved biosensor assays and technology,
yielding ever-lower limits of detection.
201,203,210
Similar to dark ﬁeld microscopy, interferometric scattering
microscopy is well-suited to being combined with other
microscopy techniques due to the simplicity of the optical
setup and the universality of light scattering. In this review, we
have discussed the incorporation of iSCAT detection in optical
traps,
139,145−149 however, this is just one of many techniques
with which iSCAT is compatible. Therefore, we anticipate more
correlative combinations to be explored, including combinations
involving scanning probe and light microscopy techniques.
Further applications of iSCAT, some of which stretch beyond
the scope of this review, focus on nanoscale imaging. Most
recently, the concept of iSCAT’s general sensitivity to changes to
local polarizability has been extended beyond the strict life
sciences context. One example is the introduction of time-
resolved iSCAT, termed stroboSCAT, where iSCAT is
performed in a pump −probe conﬁguration to monitor ultrafast
dynamics in 2D materials following photoexcitation.
310,311
iSCAT has also recently been used to monitor phase transitions
during nanoparticle charging in batteries at the single-particle
level, enabling detailed investigations of the process.
312 In
addition, another recent development is the combination of
iSCAT detection principles with mid-infrared photothermal
(MIP) microscopy. This emerging technique is particularly
exciting due to the chemical speci ﬁcity obtained during the
measurement. In visible probe MIP microscopy, the mid-IR
absorption induced photothermal e ﬀect is probed using visible
light.
313−315 The technique has recently been applied to
chemically speci ﬁc imaging of cells, 316 100 nm polystyrene
beads,317 and single virus particles. 318
Signiﬁcant advances have been made in surface plasmon
resonance microscopy, the part of the plasmonic imaging ﬁeld
covered in this review. Developments in both the experimental
methods and image analysis have enabled its application to the
study of many biological molecules and systems, including
viruses, DNA molecules, and single proteins, as well as larger
complexes such as bacteria and live mammalian cells. Despite
the near- ﬁeld enhancement provided by the surface plasmon
coupling of the incident light, the major limitation of SPRM is its
complex, elongated PSF, which renders image contrast
comparisons to nonplasmonically enhanced interferometric
approaches di ﬃ cult to elucidate. The lateral resolution, in the
direction of surface plasmon propagation, is limited by the
characteristic parabolic PSF tail, which extends for several
micrometers beyond the di ﬀraction limit of the transverse
direction. Recent attempts to tackle this issue have shown
promising results. Altering the optical system to generate images
from multiple illumination directions has proven to be an
eﬀective approach,
299 although it limits the temporal resolution
(which is restricted to the beam-scanning rate) as well as the PSF
Chemical Reviews pubs.acs.org/CR Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.1c00271
Chem. Rev. XXXX, XXX, XXX −XXX
X


===== PDF PAGE 25 =====

(which remains suboptimal due to polarization e ﬀects and
anisotropic emission). Novel image processing methods have
aided the analysis of the SPRM PSF and also enabled the
reconstruction of a symmetrical, di ﬀraction limited PSF.
308,309
T h ei n i t i a lp r o m i s eo ft h e s er e s o l u t i o n - e n h a n c e dS P R M
techniques bodes well for future iterations, which minimize
any limitations associated with temporal resolution and image
contrast.
Ever-expanding developments of the plasmonically active
substrate, including the addition of bespoke nanostructures and
nanoapertures, are enabling further near- ﬁeld enhancement, as
well as other experimental advantages, such as alternative optical
options and speci ﬁc surface functionalization. Bloch surface
wave microscopy enables many of these advantages by replacing
the metallic ﬁlm with a dielectric multilayer, which may help to
alleviate any negative e ﬀects associated with the heating of the
metallic ﬁlm. Speciﬁc parameters of this multilayer structure can
be modiﬁed to suit a range of illumination wavelengths and the
use of s-polarized light, while the SiO
2 top layer resembles that of
a typical microscope coverslip. 299 Finally, the incorporation of
surface-charge-sensitive measurements has shown great promise
for improving SPRM sensitivity toward the detection of small
molecules.
289 We anticipate many more promising technical
developments and novel appl ications introduced to the
expanding ﬁeld of plasmonic imaging in the coming years.
It is worth emphasizing the degree to which nominally very
diﬀerent methods share very similar challenges. Traditionally,
darkﬁeld, interferometric, and plasmonic microscopy have been
largely separate ﬁelds. Given the advances in these ﬁelds, the
next step changes likely require the combination of concepts and
approaches from all three, together with stronger eﬀorts in terms
of optics, detectors, and data analysis geared toward label-free
optical images. Concerted e ﬀorts have enabled revolutions in
ﬂuorescence and electron microscopy; they are now required to
fulﬁll the promise that scattering-based methods have
demonstrated over the past few decades.
AUTHOR INFORMATION
Corresponding Author
Philipp Kukura − Physical and Theoretical Chemistry
Laboratory, Department of Chemistry, University of Oxford,
Oxford OX1 3QZ, United Kingdom;
orcid.org/0000-
0003-0136-7704; Phone: +44 1865 275401;
Email: philipp.kukura@chem.ox.ac.uk; Fax: +44 1865
275410
Authors
Lee Priest − Physical and Theoretical Chemistry Laboratory,
Department of Chemistry, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1
3QZ, United Kingdom;
orcid.org/0000-0001-5906-3493
Jack S. Peters − Physical and Theoretical Chemistry
Laboratory, Department of Chemistry, University of Oxford,
Oxford OX1 3QZ, United Kingdom;
orcid.org/0000-
0001-8829-7555
Complete contact information is available at:
https://pubs.acs.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.1c00271
Author Contributions
†L.P. and J.S.P. contributed equally.
Notes
The authors declare no competing ﬁnancial interest.
Biographies
Lee Priest studied Natural Sciences at University College London and
received his MSci degree in 2016. He is currently a Ph.D. student in the
Kukura Group at the University of Oxford. His research has focused on
advancing the sensitivity of interferometric imaging techniques,
primarily in the context of mass photometry particle detection.
Jack S. Peters studied at the University of Warwick and received his
MChem degree in 2018. He is currently a graduate student under the
supervision of Professor Philipp Kukura at the University of Oxford. His
current research focuses on technological development of mass
photometry, with the aim of improving the sensitivity and mass
resolution of the technique.
Philipp Kukura is Professor of Chemistry and Fellow of Exeter College
at the University of Oxford. He received an MChem from the
University of Oxford (2002) and a Ph.D. from the University of
California, Berkeley (2006). After postdoctoral work at ETH Zurich, he
joined the Chemistry Department at the University of Oxford as
Research Fellow (2010), Lecturer (2011), and then full Professor
(2016). Honours and awards include the Royal Society of Chemistry
Harrison Meldola Award (2011), the Royal Society of Chemistry
Marlow Award (2015), the EBSA Young Investigator Award (2017),
the Royal Society Wolfson Research Merit Award (2018), the Klung-
Wilhelmy Science award in Chemistry (2018), the Blavatnik Award for
Young Scientists UK in Chemistry (2019), and the RMS Medal for
Light Microscopy (2021). His current research interests include the
application of ultrasensitive light microscopy to study bimolecular
structure and interactions.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
P. K. is supported by an ERC Consolidator grant (PHOTO-
MASS 819593) and an EPSRC Leadership Fellowship (EP/
T03419X/1). L.P. is supported by the Christ Church Moritz-
Heyman Award and the EPSRC Doctoral Training Partnership.
J.S.P. is supported by the EPSRC Doctoral Training Partnership.
We thank Catherine Lichten and other members of the Kukura
Group who provided highly valued feedback and input to this
article. The ﬁeld of optical microscopy, and its application to
nanoscale phenomena has seen tremendous activity over the
past decades, and while we have made our best e ﬀort in being
comprehensive, it is likely unavoidable that we may have missed
important and relevant contributions, for which we would like to
apologize. We very much acknowledge all those who contribute
to this incredibly exciting and rapidly progressing ﬁeld.
ABBREVIATIONS
AOD = acousto-optic de ﬂector
Apols = amphipols
ABEL = anti-Brownian electrokinetic
ATR = attenuated total re ﬂection
ARI = azimuthal rotation illumination
BFP = back focal plane
BSW = Bloch surface wave
BSWM = Bloch surface wave microscopy
BSA = bovine serum albumin
COBRI = coherent bright- ﬁeld microscopy
CCMV = cowpea chlorotic mottle virus
cryo-EM = cryo-electron microscopy
DIC = di ﬀerential interference contrast
DLS = dynamic light scattering
FBS = fetal bovine serum
FOV = ﬁeld of view
Chemical Reviews pubs.acs.org/CR Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.1c00271
Chem. Rev. XXXX, XXX, XXX −XXX
Y


===== PDF PAGE 26 =====

FWHM = full width at half-maximum
GNP = gold nanoparticle
GNR = gold nanorod
HBsAg = hepatitis B surface antigen
IgA = human immunoglobulin A
IgM = human immunoglobulin M
ITO = indium tin oxide
IRM = interference re ﬂection microscopy
iPM = interferometric plasmonic microscopy
IRIS = interferometric re ﬂectance imaging sensor
iSCAT = interferometric scattering microscopy
LED = light emitting diode
LSPR = localized surface plasmon
LRSPR = long-range surface plasmon resonance
MP = mass photometry
MS = mass spectrometry
MIP = mid-infrared photothermal
nanoCET = nanocapillary electrophoretic tracking
NA = numerical aperture
OmpF = outer membrane protein
PCM = phase contrast microscopy
PT-SLM = photothermal spatial light modulator
PFU = plaque-forming units
PSM = plasmonic scattering microscopy
P-EIM = plasmonic-based electrochemical impedance
microscopy
PSF = point-spread function
PBS = polarizing beamsplitter
PEG = polyethylene glycol
QPD = quadrant photodiode
QWP = quarter wave plate
RICM = re ﬂection interference contrast microscopy
ROI = region of interest
RF-SCAT = remote focusing interferometric scattering
microscopy
ROCS = rotating coherent scattering
SEM = scanning electron microscopy
SLSPM = scanning localized surface plasmon microscopy
SNR = signal-to-noise ratio
SP-IRIS = single-particle interferometric re ﬂectance imaging
sensor
SPT = single-particle tracking
miRNA = single-strand microRNA
SP = surface plasmon
SPP = surface plasmon polaritons
SPR = surface plasmon resonance
SPRI = surface plasmon resonance imaging
SPRM = surface plasmon resonance microscopy
SPCEM = surface plasmon-coupled emission microscopy
TIR = total internal re ﬂection
TIRF = total internal re ﬂection ﬂuorescence
TIRS = total internal re ﬂection scattering
2D-SPR = two-dimensional surface plasmon resonance
TFP = type IV pili
VSV = vesicular stomatitis virus
WSM = waveguide scattering microscopy
REFERENCES
(1) Binnig, G.; Rohrer, H.; Gerber, C.; Weibel, E. Surface Studies by
Scanning Tunneling Microscopy. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1982, 49,5 7−61.
(2) Eigler, D. M.; Schweizer, E. K. Positioning Single Atoms with a
Scanning Tunnelling Microscope. Nature 1990, 344, 524−526.
(3) Binnig, G.; Quate, C. F.; Gerber, C. Atomic Force Microscope.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 1986, 56, 930−933.
(4) Ando, T.; Kodera, N.; Takai, E.; Maruyama, D.; Saito, K.; Toda, A.
A High-Speed Atomic Force Microscope for Studying Biological
Macromolecules. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2001, 98, 12468−12472.
(5) Moerner, W. E.; Kador, L. Optical Detection and Spectroscopy of
Single Molecules in a Solid. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1989, 62, 2535−2538.
(6) Orrit, M.; Bernard, J. Single Pentacene Molecules Detected by
Fluorescence Excitation in a P-Terphenyl Crystal. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1990,
65, 2716−2719.
(7) Neuhauser, W.; Hohenstatt, M.; Toschek, P. E.; Dehmelt, H.
Localized Visible Ba+ Mono-Ion Oscillator. Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt.
Phys. 1980, 22, 1137−1140.
(8) Moerner, W. E.; Orrit, M. Illuminating Single Molecules in
Condensed Matter. Science 1999, 283, 1670−1676.
(9) Dickson, R. M.; Cubitt, A. B.; Tsien, R. Y.; Moerner, W. E. On/off
Blinking and Switching Behaviour of Single Molecules of Green
Fluorescent Protein. Nature 1997, 388, 355−358.
(10) Betzig, E.; Patterson, G. H.; Sougrat, R.; Lindwasser, O. W.;
Olenych, S.; Bonifacino, J. S.; Davidson, M. W.; Lippincott-Schwartz, J.;
Hess, H. F. Imaging Intracellular Fluorescent Proteins at Nanometer
Resolution. Science 2006, 313, 1642−1645.
(11) Rust, M. J.; Bates, M.; Zhuang, X. Sub-Diffraction-Limit Imaging
by Stochastic Optical Reconstruction Microscopy (STORM). Nat.
Methods 2006, 3, 793−795.
(12) Hess, S. T.; Girirajan, T. P. K.; Mason, M. D. Ultra-High
Resolution Imaging by Fluorescence Photoactivation Localization
Microscopy. Biophys. J. 2006, 91, 4258−4272.
(13) Dempsey, G. T.; Vaughan, J. C.; Chen, K. H.; Bates, M.; Zhuang,
X. Evaluation of Fluorophores for Optimal Performance in Local-
ization-Based Super-Resolution Imaging. Nat. Methods 2011, 8, 1027−
1040.
(14) Gwosch, K. C.; Pape, J. K.; Balzarotti, F.; Hoess, P.; Ellenberg, J.;
Ries, J.; Hell, S. W. MINFLUX Nanoscopy Delivers 3D Multicolor
Nanometer Resolution in Cells. Nat. Methods 2020, 17, 217−224.
(15) Siedentopf, H.; Zsigmondy, R. Uber Sichtbarmachung Und
Größenbestimmung Ultramikoskopischer Teilchen, Mit Besonderer
Anwendung Auf Goldrubingla ̈ser. Ann. Phys. 1902, 315,1 −39.
(16) Zernike, F. Das Phasenkontrastverfahren Bei Der Mikroskopi-
schen Beobachtung. Z. Technol. Phys. 1935, 16, 454−457.
(17) Zernike, F. Phase Contrast, a New Method for the Microscopic
Observation of Transparent Objects. Physica 1942, 9, 686−698.
(18) Zernike, F. Phase Contrast, a New Method for the Microscopic
Observation of Transparent Objects Part II. Physica 1942, 9, 974−986.
(19) Nomarski, G. Microinterfe ́romètre Diffe ́rentiel a ̀Ondes
Polarisées. J. Phys. Radium 1955, 16,9 S−11S.
(20) Allen, R. D.; David, G. B.; Nomarski, G. The Zeiss-Nomarski
Differential Interference Equipment for Transmitted-Light Micros-
copy. Z. Wiss. Mikrosk. 1969, 69, 193−221.
(21) Curtis, A. S. The Mechanism of Adhesion of Cells to Glass. A
Study by Interference Reflection Microscopy. J. Cell Biol. 1964,
20,
199−215.
(22) Verschueren, H. Interference Reflection Microscopy in Cell
Biology: Methodology and Applications. J. Cell Sci. 1985, 75, 279−301.
(23) Ploem, J. S. Reﬂection-Contrast Microscopy as a Tool for
Investigation of the Attachment of Living Cells to a Glass Surface ; Van
Furth, R., Ed.; Blackwell Scienti ﬁc: Oxford, 1975.
(24) Limozin, L.; Sengupta, K. Quantitative Reflection Interference
Contrast Microscopy (RICM) in Soft Matter and Cell Adhesion.
ChemPhysChem 2009, 10, 2752−2768.
(25) Gaiduk, A.; Yorulmaz, M.; Ruijgrok, P. V.; Orrit, M. Room-
Temperature Detection of a Single Molecule ’sA b s o r p t i o nb y
Photothermal Contrast. Science 2010, 330, 353−356.
(26) Celebrano, M.; Kukura, P.; Renn, A.; Sandoghdar, V. Single-
Molecule Imaging by Optical Absorption. Nat. Photonics 2011, 5,9 5−
98.
(27) Chong, S.; Min, W.; Xie, X. S. Ground-State Depletion
Microscopy: Detection Sensitivi ty of Single-Molecule Optical
Chemical Reviews pubs.acs.org/CR Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.1c00271
Chem. Rev. XXXX, XXX, XXX −XXX
Z


===== PDF PAGE 27 =====

Absorption at Room Temperature. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2010, 1, 3316−
3322.
(28) Vollmer, F.; Arnold, S. Whispering-Gallery-Mode Biosensing:
Label-Free Detection down to Single Molecules. Nat. Methods 2008, 5,
591−596.
(29) Vollmer, F.; Swaim, J. D.; Foreman, M. R. Whispering Gallery
Mode Sensors. Adv. Opt. Photonics 2015, 7, 168−240.
(30) Baaske, M. D.; Vollmer, F. Optical Observation of Single Atomic
Ions Interacting with Plasmonic Nanorods in Aqueous Solution. Nat.
Photonics 2016, 10, 733−739.
(31) Abbe, E. Beitra ̈ge Zur Theorie Des Mikroskops Und Der
Mikroskopischen Wahrnehmung: I. Die Construction von Mikros-
kopen Auf Grund Der Theorie. Arch. für mikroskopische Anat. 1873, 9,
413−418.
(32) Ortega Arroyo, J.; Andrecka, J.; Spillane, K. M.; Billington, N.;
Takagi, Y.; Sellers, J. R.; Kukura, P. Label-Free, All-Optical Detection,
Imaging, and Tracking of a Single Protein. Nano Lett. 2014, 14, 2065−
2070.
(33) Piliarik, M.; Sandoghdar, V. Direct Optical Sensing of Single
Unlabelled Proteins and Super-Resolution Imaging of Their Binding
Sites. Nat. Commun. 2014, 5, 4495.
(34) Young, G.; Hundt, N.; Cole, D.; Fineberg, A.; Andrecka, J.; Tyler,
A.; Olerinyova, A.; Ansari, A.; Marklund, E. G.; Collier, M. P.; et al.
Quantitative Mass Imaging of Single Biological Macromolecules.
Science 2018, 360, 423−427.
(35) Stallinga, S.; Rieger, B. Accuracy of the Gaussian Point Spread
Function Model in 2D Localization Microscopy. Opt. Express 2010, 18,
24461.
(36) Thompson, R. E.; Larson, D. R.; Webb, W. W. Precise
Nanometer Localization Analysis for Individual Fluorescent Probes.
Biophys. J. 2002, 82, 2775−2783.
(37) Bohren, C. F.; Hu ﬀman, D. R. Absorption and Scattering of Light
by Small Particles
; John Wiley & Sons: New York, 1983.
(38) Agio, M.; Mojarad, N. M.; Sandoghdar, V. Plasmon Spectra of
Nanospheres under a Tightly Focused Beam. J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 2008,
25, 651−658.
(39) Lieb, M. A.; Zavislan, J. M.; Novotny, L. Single-Molecule
Orientations Determined by Direct Emission Pattern Imaging. J. Opt.
Soc. Am. B 2004, 21, 1210-1215.
(40) Brokmann, X.; Coolen, L.; Hermier, J. P.; Dahan, M. Emission
Properties of Single CdSe/ZnS Quantum Dots Close to a Dielectric
Interface. Chem. Phys. 2005, 318,9 1−98.
(41) Lee, K. G.; Chen, X. W.; Eghlidi, H.; Kukura, P.; Lettow, R.;
Renn, A.; Sandoghdar, V.; Götzinger, S. A Planar Dielectric Antenna for
Directional Single-Photon Emission and near-Unity Collection
Efficiency. Nature Photonics 2011, 166 −169, DOI: 10.1038/npho-
ton.2010.312.
(42) Weigel, A.; Sebesta, A.; Kukura, P. Dark Field Microspectroscopy
with Single Molecule Fluorescence Sensitivity. ACS Photonics 2014, 1,
848−856.
(43) Cole, D.; Young, G.; Weigel, A.; Sebesta, A.; Kukura, P. Label-
Free Single-Molecule Imaging with Numerical-Aperture-Shaped
Interferometric Scattering Microscopy. ACS Photonics 2017, 4, 211 −
216.
(44) Liebel, M.; Hugall, J. T.; Van Hulst, N. F. Ultrasensitive Label-
Free Nanosensing and High-Speed Tracking of Single Proteins. Nano
Lett. 2017, 17, 1277−1281.
(45) Avci, O.; Campana, M. I.; Yurdakul, C.; Selim U ̈nlü, M. Pupil
Function Engineering for Enhanced Nanoparticle Visibility in Wide-
Field Interferometric Microscopy. Optica 2017, 4, 247-254.
(46) Horio, T.; Hotani, H. Visualization of the Dynamic Instability of
Individual Microtubules by Dark-Field Microscopy. Nature 1986, 321,
605−607.
(47) Kudo, S.; Magariyama, Y.; Aizawa, S. I. Abrupt Changes in
Flagellar Rotation Observed by Laser Dark-Field Microscopy. Nature
1990, 346, 677−680.
(48) Nishiyama, M.; Muto, E.; Inoue, Y.; Yanagida, T.; Higuchi, H.
Substeps within the 8-Nm Step of the ATPase Cycle of Single Kinesin
Molecules. Nat. Cell Biol.
2001, 3, 425−428.
(49) Yasuda, R.; Noji, H.; Yoshida, M.; Kinosita, K.; Itoh, H.
Resolution of Distinct Rotational Substeps by Submillisecond Kinetic
Analysis of F1-ATPase. Nature 2001, 410, 898−904.
(50) Dunn, A. R.; Spudich, J. A. Dynamics of the Unbound Head
during Myosin V Processive Translocation. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 2007,
14, 246−248.
(51) Axelrod, D. Total Internal Reflection Fluorescence Microscopy
in Cell Biology. Traffic 2001, 2, 764−774.
(52) Schneckenburger, H. Total Internal Reflection Fluorescence
Microscopy: Technical Innovations and Novel Applications. Curr.
Opin. Biotechnol. 2005, 16,1 3−18.
(53) Mattheyses, A. L.; Simon, S. M.; Rappoport, J. Z. Imaging with
Total Internal Reflection Fluorescence Microscopy for the Cell
Biologist. J. Cell Sci. 2010, 123, 3621−3628.
(54) Ambrose, E. J. A Surface Contact Microscope for the Study of
Cell Movements. Nature 1956, 178, 1194.
(55) Ambrose, E. J. The Movements of Fibrocytes.Exp. Cell Res. 1961,
8,5 4−73.
(56) Braslavsky, I.; Amit, R.; Jaffar Ali, B. M.; Gileadi, O.; Oppenheim,
A.; Stavans, J. Objective-Type Dark-Field Illumination for Scattering
from Microbeads. Appl. Opt. 2001, 40, 5650−5657.
(57) Stout, A. L.; Axelrod, D. Evanescent Field Excitation of
Fluorescence by Epi-Illumination Microscopy. Appl. Opt. 1989, 28,
5237−5242.
(58) Meng, X.; Sonn-Segev, A.; Schumacher, A.; Cole, D.; Young, G.;
Thorpe, S.; Style, R. W.; Dufresne, E. R.; Kukura, P. Micromirror Total
Internal Re ﬂection Microscopy for High-Performance Single Particle
Tracking at Interfaces. arXiv2021, 2103.09738
(59) Ueno, H.; Nishikawa, S.; Iino, R.; Tabata, K. V.; Sakakihara, S.;
Yanagida, T.; Noji, H. Simple Dark-Field Microscopy with Nanometer
Spatial Precision and Microsecond Temporal Resolution. Biophys. J.
2010, 98, 2014−2023.
(60) Kobayashi, R.; Ueno, H.; Li, C. B.; Noji, H. Rotary Catalysis of
Bovine Mitochondrial F1-ATPase Studied by Single-Molecule Experi-
ments. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2020, 117, 1447−1456.
(61) Watanabe, R.; Minagawa, Y.; Noji, H. Thermodynamic Analysis
of F 1 -ATPase Rotary Catalysis Using High-Speed Imaging. Protein Sci.
2014, 23, 1773−1779.
(62) Li, C. B.; Ueno, H.; Watanabe, R.; Noji, H.; Komatsuzaki, T. ATP
Hydrolysis Assists Phosphate Release and Promotes Reaction Ordering
in F1 -ATPase. Nat. Commun. 2015, 6, 10223.
(63) Watanabe, R.; Hayashi, K.; Ueno, H.; Noji, H. Catalysis-
Enhancement via Rotary Fluctuation of F1-Atpase. Biophys. J. 2013,
105, 2385−2391.
(64) Hayashi, S.; Ueno, H.; Shaikh, A. R.; Umemura, M.; Kamiya, M.;
Ito, Y.; Ikeguchi, M.; Komoriya, Y.; Iino, R.; Noji, H. Molecular
Mechanism of ATP Hydrolysis in F1-ATPase Revealed by Molecular
Simulations and Single-Molecule Observations. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2012,
134, 8447−8454.
(65) Minagawa, Y.; Ueno, H.; Hara, M.; Ishizuka-Katsura, Y.; Ohsawa,
N.; Terada, T.; Shirouzu, M.; Yokoyama, S.; Yamato, I.; Muneyuki, E.;
et al. Basic Properties of Rotary Dynamics of the Molecular Motor
Enterococcus Hirae V1-ATPase. J. Biol. Chem. 2013, 288, 32700 −
32707.
(66) Iida, T.; Minagawa, Y.; Ueno, H.; Kawai, F.; Murata, T.; Iino, R.
Single-Molecule Analysis Reveals Rotational Substeps and Chemo-
Mechanical Coupling Scheme of Enterococcus Hirae V1-ATPase. J.
Biol. Chem. 2019, 294, 17017−17030.
(67) Ueno, H.; Minagawa, Y.; Hara, M.; Rahman, S.; Yamato, I.;
Muneyuki, E.; Noji, H.; Murata, T.; Iino, R. Torque Generation of
Enterococcus Hirae V-ATPase. J. Biol. Chem. 2014, 289, 31212−31223.
(68) Nishikawa, S.; Arimoto, I.; Ikezaki, K.; Sugawa, M.; Ueno, H.;
Komori, T.; Iwane, A. H.; Yanagida, T. Switch between Large Hand-
Over-Hand and Small Inchworm-like Steps in Myosin VI. Cell 2010,
142, 879−888.
(69) Isojima, H.; Iino, R.; Niitani, Y.; Noji, H.; Tomishige, M. Direct
Observation of Intermediate States during the Stepping Motion of
Kinesin-1. Nat. Chem. Biol. 2016, 12, 290−297.
Chemical Reviews pubs.acs.org/CR Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.1c00271
Chem. Rev. XXXX, XXX, XXX −XXX
AA


===== PDF PAGE 28 =====

(70) Nakamura, A.; Okazaki, K.-i; Furuta, T.; Sakurai, M.; Iino, R.
Processive Chitinase Is Brownian Monorail Operated by Fast Catalysis
after Peeling Rail from Crystalline Chitin. Nat. Commun. 2018, 9, 3814.
(71) Enoki, S.; Iino, R.; Morone, N.; Kaihatsu, K.; Sakakihara, S.; Kato,
N.; Noji, H. Label-Free Single-Particle Imaging of the Influenza Virus
by Objective-Type Total Internal Reflection Dark-Field Microscopy.
PLoS One 2012, 7, No. e49208.
(72) Ando, J.; Nakamura, A.; Visootsat, A.; Yamamoto, M.; Song, C.;
Murata, K.; Iino, R. Single-Nanoparticle Tracking with Angstrom
Localization Precision and Microsecond Time Resolution. Biophys. J.
2018, 115, 2413−2427.
(73) Ando, J.; Shima, T.; Kanazawa, R.; Shimo-Kon, R.; Nakamura, A.;
Yamamoto, M.; Kon, T.; Iino, R. Small Stepping Motion of Processive
Dynein Revealed by Load-Free High-Speed Single-Particle Tracking.
Sci. Rep. 2020, 10, 1080.
(74) Ando, J.; Nakamura, A.; Yamamoto, M.; Song, C.; Murata, K.;
Iino, R. Multicolor High-Speed Tracking of Single Biomolecules with
Silver, Gold, and Silver-Gold Alloy Nanoparticles. ACS Photonics 2019,
6, 2870−2883.
(75) Sönnichsen, C.; Alivisatos, A. P. Gold Nanorods as Novel
Nonbleaching Plasmon-Based Orientation Sensors for Polarized
Single-Particle Microscopy. Nano Lett. 2005, 5, 301−304.
(76) Huang, X.; Neretina, S.; El-Sayed, M. A. Gold Nanorods: From
Synthesis and Properties to Biological and Biomedical Applications.
Adv. Mater. 2009, 21, 4880−4910.
(77) Mazaheri, M.; Ehrig, J.; Shkarin, A.; Zaburdaev, V.; Sandoghdar,
V. Ultrahigh-Speed Imaging of Rotational Diffusion on a Lipid Bilayer.
Nano Lett. 2020, 20, 7213−7219.
(78) Wicker, K.; Heintzmann, R. Resolving a Misconception about
Structured Illumination. Nat. Photonics 2014, 8, 342−344.
(79) Cronin, D. J.; Smith, A. E. Dynamic Coherent Optical System.
Opt. Eng. 1973, 12, 120250.
(80) Cotte, Y.; Toy, F.; Jourdain, P.; Pavillon, N.; Boss, D.;
Magistretti, P.; Marquet, P.; Depeursinge, C. Marker-Free Phase
Nanoscopy. Nat. Photonics 2013, 7, 113−117.
(81) Zheng, G.; Horstmeyer, R.; Yang, C. Wide-Field, High-
Resolution Fourier Ptychographic Microscopy. Nat. Photonics 2013,
7
, 739−745.
(82) Maire, G.; Giovannini, H.; Talneau, A.; Chaumet, P. C.; Belkebir,
K.; Sentenac, A. Phase Imaging and Synthetic Aperture Super-
Resolution via Total Internal Reflection Microscopy. Opt. Lett. 2018,
43, 2173−2176.
(83) Chowdhury, S.; Dhalla, A.-H.; Izatt, J. Structured Oblique
Illumination Microscopy for Enhanced Resolution Imaging of Non-
Fluorescent, Coherently Scattering Samples. Biomed. Opt. Express
2012, 3, 1841−1854.
(84) von Olshausen, P.; Rohrbach, A. Coherent Total Internal
Reflection Dark-Field Microscopy: Label-Free Imaging beyond the
Diffraction Limit. Opt. Lett. 2013, 38, 4066−4069.
(85) Ju ̈nger, F.; Olshausen, P. V.; Rohrbach, A. Fast, Label-Free
Super-Resolution Live-Cell Ima ging Using Rotating Coherent
Scattering (ROCS) Microscopy. Sci. Rep. 2016 , 6, 30393
DOI: 10.1038/srep30393.
(86) Heintzmann, R.; Cremer, C. G. Laterally Modulated Excitation
Microscopy: Improvement of Resolution by Using a Di ﬀraction
Grating. In Optical Biopsies and Microscopic Techniques III ; SPIE,
1999; Vol. 3568, pp 185 −196 DOI: 10.1117/12.336833.
(87) Gustafsson, M. G. L. Surpassing the Lateral Resolution Limit by a
Factor of Two Using Structured Illumination Microscopy. J. Microsc.
2000, 198,8 2−87.
(88) Heintzmann, R.; Huser, T. Super-Resolution Structured
Illumination Microscopy. Chem. Rev. 2017, 117, 13890−13908.
(89) Koch, M. D.; Rohrbach, A. Label-Free Imaging and Bending
Analysis of Microtubules by ROCS Microscopy and Optical Trapping.
Biophys. J. 2018, 114, 168−177.
(90) Ju ̈nger, F.; Rohrbach, A. Strong Cytoskeleton Activity on
Millisecond Timescales upon Particle Binding Revealed by ROCS
Microscopy. Cytoskeleton 2018, 75, 410−424.
(91) Ruh, D.; Mutschler, J.; Michelbach, M.; Rohrbach, A. Superior
Contrast and Resolution by Image Formation in Rotating Coherent
Scattering (ROCS) Microscopy.
Optica 2018, 5, 1371−1381.
(92) Nan, X.; Sims, P. A.; Xie, X. S. Organelle Tracking in a Living Cell
with Microsecond Time Resolution and Nanometer Spatial Precision.
ChemPhysChem 2008, 9, 707−712.
(93) Sudhakar, S.; Abdosamadi, M. K.; Jachowski, T. J.; Bugiel, M.;
Jannasch, A.; Schäffer, E. Germanium Nanospheres for Ultraresolution
Picotensiometry of Kinesin Motors. Science 2021, 371, No. eabd9944.
(94) Mickolajczyk, K. J.; Deffenbaugh, N. C.; Ortega Arroyo, J.;
Andrecka, J.; Kukura, P.; Hancock, W. O. Kinetics of Nucleotide-
Dependent Structural Transitions in the Kinesin-1 Hydrolysis Cycle.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2015, 112, E7186−E7193.
(95) Sowa, Y.; Steel, B. C.; Berry, R. M. A Simple Backscattering
Microscope for Fast Tracking of Biological Molecules. Rev. Sci. Instrum.
2010, 81, 113704.
(96) Nord, A. L.; Sowa, Y.; Steel, B. C.; Lo, C. J.; Berry, R. M. Speed of
the Bacterial Flagellar Motor near Zero Load Depends on the Number
of Stator Units. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2017, 114, 11603−11608.
(97) Lo, C. J.; Sowa, Y.; Pilizota, T.; Berry, R. M. Mechanism and
Kinetics of a Sodium-Driven Bacterial Flagellar Motor. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U. S. A. 2013, 110, E2544−E2551.
(98) Xiao, L.; Qiao, Y.; He, Y.; Yeung, E. S. Three Dimensional
Orientational Imaging of Nanoparticles with Darkfield Microscopy.
Anal. Chem. 2010, 82, 5268−5274.
(99) Enoki, S.; Iino, R.; Niitani, Y.; Minagawa, Y.; Tomishige, M.;
Noji, H. High-Speed Angle-Resolved Imaging of a Single Gold
Nanorod with Microsecond Temporal Resolution and One-Degree
Angle Precision. Anal. Chem. 2015, 87, 2079−2086.
(100) Grandin, H. M.; Städler, B.; Textor, M.; Vörös, J. Waveguide
Excitation Fluorescence Microscopy: A New Tool for Sensing and
Imaging the Biointerface. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2006, 21, 1476−1482.
(101) Agnarsson, B.; Ingthorsson, S.; Gudjonsson, T.; Leosson, K.
Evanescent-Wave Fluorescence Microscopy Using Symmetric Planar
Waveguides. Opt. Express 2009, 17, 5075−5082.
(102) Archetti, A.; Glushkov, E.; Sieben, C.; Stroganov, A.; Radenovic,
A.; Manley, S. Waveguide-PAINT Offers an Open Platform for Large
Field-of-View Super-Resolution Imaging. Nat. Commun. 2019, 10,
1267.
(103) Thoma, F.; Langbein, U.; Mittler-Neher, S. Waveguide
Scattering Microscopy. Opt. Commun. 1997, 134,1 6−20.
(104) Ni, W.; Chen, H.; Kou, X.; Yeung, M. H.; Wang, J. Optical
Fiber-Excited Surface Plasmon Resonance Spectroscopy of Single and
Ensemble Gold Nanorods. J. Phys. Chem. C 2008, 112, 8105−8109.
(105) Hill, D. J.; Pinion, C. W.; Christesen, J. D.; Cahoon, J. F.
Waveguide Scattering Microscopy for Dark-Field Imaging and
Spectroscopy of Photonic Nanostructures. ACS Photonics 2014, 1,
725−731.
(106) Agnarsson, B.; Lundgren, A.; Gunnarsson, A.; Rabe, M.; Kunze,
A.; Mapar, M.; Simonsson, L.; Bally, M.; Zhdanov, V. P.; Höök, F.
Evanescent Light-Scattering Microscopy for Label-Free Interfacial
Imaging: From Single Sub-100 Nm Vesicles to Live Cells. ACS Nano
2015, 9, 11849−11862.
(107) Agnarsson, B.; Mapar, M.; Sjöberg, M.; Alizadehheidari, M.;
Höök, F. Low-Temperature Fabrication and Characterization of a
Symmetric Hybrid Organic-Inorganic Slab Waveguide for Evanescent
Light Microscopy. Nano Futures 2018, 2, 025007.
(108) Lundgren, A.; Agnarsson, rn; Zirbs, R.; Zhdanov, V. P.;
R e i m h u l t ,E . ;H o o k ,F .N o n s p e c i fic Colloidal-Type Interaction
Explains Size-Dependent Specific Binding of Membrane-Targeted
Nanoparticles Article. ACS Nano 2016, 10, 9974−9982.
(109) Agnarsson, B.; Wayment-Steele, H. K.; Höök, F.; Kunze, A.
Monitoring of Single and Double Lipid Membrane Formation with
High Spatiotemporal Resolution Using Evanescent Light Scattering
Microscopy †. Nanoscale 2016, 8, 19219.
(110) Rupert, D. L. M.; Mapar, M.; Shelke, G. V.; Norling, K.;
Elmeskog, M.; Lotvall, J. O.; Block, S.; Bally, M.; Agnarsson, rn; Hook,
F. Effective Refractive Index and Lipid Content of Extracellular Vesicles
Chemical Reviews pubs.acs.org/CR Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.1c00271
Chem. Rev. XXXX, XXX, XXX −XXX
AB


===== PDF PAGE 29 =====

Revealed Using Optical Waveguide Scattering and Fluorescence
Microscopy. Langmuir 2018, 34, 8522−8531.
(111) Hannestad, J. K.; Rocha, S.; Agnarsson, B.; Zhdanov, V. P.;
Wittung-Stafshede, P.; Höök, F. Single-Vesicle Imaging Reveals Lipid-
Selective and Stepwise Membrane Disruption by Monomeric α-
Synuclein. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2020, 117, 14178−14186.
(112) Faez, S.; Lahini, Y.; Weidlich, S.; Garmann, R. F.; Wondraczek,
K.; Zeisberger, M.; Schmidt, M. A.; Orrit, M.; Manoharan, V. N. Fast,
Label-Free Tracking of Single Viruses and Weakly Scattering
Nanoparticles in a Nanofluidic Optical Fiber. ACS Nano 2015, 9,
12349−12357.
(113) Faez, S.; Samin, S.; Baasanjav, D.; Weidlich, S.; Schmidt, M.;
Mosk, A. P. Nanocapillary Electrokinetic Tracking for Monitoring
Charge Fluctuations on a Single Nanoparticle. Faraday Discuss. 2016,
193, 447−458.
(114) Jiang, S.; Zhao, J.; Förster, R.; Weidlich, S.; Plidschun, M.;
Kobelke, J.; Fatobene Ando, R.; Schmidt, M. A. Three Dimensional
Spatiotemporal Nano-Scale Position Retrieval of the Confined
Diffusion of Nano-Objects inside Optofluidic Microstructured Fibers.
Nanoscale 2020, 12, 3146−3156.
(115) Jiang, S.; Förster, R.; Plidschun, M.; Kobelke, J.; Fatobene
Ando, R.; Schmidt, M. A. Three-Dimensional Spatiotemporal Tracking
of Nano-Objects Diffusing in Water-Filled Optofluidic Microstructured
Fiber. Nanophotonics 2020, 9, 4545−4554.
(116) Förster, R.; Weidlich, S.; Nissen, M.; Wieduwilt, T.; Kobelke, J.;
Goldfain, A. M.; Chiang, T. K.; Garmann, R. F.; Manoharan, V. N.;
Lahini, Y.; et al. Tracking and Analyzing the Brownian Motion of Nano-
Objects Inside Hollow Core Fibers. ACS Sensors 2020, 5, 879−886.
(117) Hartung, A.; Kobelke, J.; Schwuchow, A.; Bierlich, J.; Popp, J.;
Schmidt, M. A.; Frosch, T. Low-Loss Single-Mode Guidance in Large-
Core Antiresonant Hollow-Core Fibers. Opt. Lett. 2015, 40, 3432 −
3435.
(118) Kukura, P.; Ewers, H.; Mu ̈ller, C.; Renn, A.; Helenius, A.;
Sandoghdar, V. High-Speed Nanoscopic Tracking of the Position and
Orientation of a Single Virus. Nat. Methods 2009, 6, 923−927.
(119) Amos, L. A.; Amos, W. B. The Bending of Sliding Microtubules
Imaged by Confocal Light Microscopy and Negative Stain Electron
Microscopy. J. Cell Sci. 1991, 1991,9 5−101.
(120) Lindfors, K.; Kalkbrenner, T.; Stoller, P.; Sandoghdar, V.
Detection and Spectroscopy of Gold Nanoparticles Using Super-
continuum White Light Confocal Microscopy. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2004, 93
,
037401.
(121) Jacobsen, V.; Stoller, P.; Brunner, C.; Vogel, V.; Sandoghdar, V.
Interferometric Optical Detection and Tracking of Very Small Gold
Nanoparticles at a Water-Glass Interface. Opt. Express 2006, 14, 405−
414.
(122) Ewers, H.; Jacobsen, V.; Klotzsch, E.; Smith, A. E.; Helenius, A.;
Sandoghdar, V. Label-Free Optical Detection and Tracking of Single
Virions Bound to Their Receptors in Supported Membrane Bilayers.
Nano Lett. 2007, 7, 2263−2266.
(123) Kukura, P.; Celebrano, M.; Renn, A.; Sandoghdar, V. Imaging a
Single Quantum Dot When It Is Dark. Nano Lett. 2009, 9, 926−929.
(124) Holanová, K.; Vala, M.; Piliarik, M. Optical Imaging and
Localization of Prospective Scattering Labels Smaller than a Single
Protein. Opt. Laser Technol. 2019, 109, 323−327.
(125) Ortega-Arroyo, J.; Kukura, P. Interferometric Scattering
Microscopy (ISCAT): New Frontiers in Ultrafast and Ultrasensitive
Optical Microscopy. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2012, 14, 15625−15636.
(126) Taylor, R. W.; Sandoghdar, V. Interferometric Scattering
Microscopy: Seeing Single Nanoparticles and Molecules via Rayleigh
Scattering. Nano Lett. 2019, 19, 4827−4835.
(127) Taylor, R. W.; Sandoghdar, V. Interferometric Scattering
(ISCAT) Microscopy and Related Techniques. In Label-Free Super-
Resolution Microscopy. Biological and Medical Physics, Biomedical
Engineering; Astratov, V., Ed.; Springer: Cham, 2019.
(128) Young, G.; Kukura, P. Interferometric Scattering Microscopy.
Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 2019, 70, 301−322.
(129) Lin, Y.-H.; Chang, W.-L.; Hsieh, C.-L. Shot-Noise Limited
Localization of Single 20 Nm Gold Particles with Nanometer Spatial
Precision within Microseconds. Opt. Express 2014, 22, 9159−9170.
(130) Spindler, S.; Ehrig, J.; König, K.; Nowak, T.; Piliarik, M.; Stein,
H. E.; Taylor, R. W.; Garanger, E.; Lecommandoux, S.; Alves, I. D.; et al.
Visualization of Lipids and Proteins at High Spatial and Temporal
Resolution via Interferometric Scattering (ISCAT) Microscopy. J. Phys.
D: Appl. Phys. 2016, 49, 274002.
(131) Liao, Y. H.; Lin, C. H.; Cheng, C. Y.; Wong, W. C.; Juo, J. Y.;
Hsieh, C. L. Monovalent and Oriented Labeling of Gold Nanoprobes
for the High-Resolution Tracking of a Single-Membrane Molecule.
ACS Nano 2019, 13, 10918−10928.
(132) Spindler, S.; Sibold, J.; Gholami Mahmoodabadi, R.; Steinem,
C.; Sandoghdar, V. High-Speed Microscopy of Diffusion in Pore-
Spanning Lipid Membranes. Nano Lett. 2018
, 18, 5262−5271.
(133) Andrecka, J.; Takagi, Y.; Mickolajczyk, K. J. J.; Lippert, L. G. G.;
Sellers, J. R. R.; Hancock, W. O. O.; Goldman, Y. E. E.; Kukura, P.
Interferometric Scattering Microscopy for the Study of Molecular
Motors. Methods Enzymol. 2016, 581, 517−539.
(134) Andrecka, J.; Ortega Arroyo, J.; Takagi, Y.; de Wit, G.; Fineberg,
A.; MacKinnon, L.; Young, G.; Sellers, J. R.; Kukura, P. Structural
Dynamics of Myosin 5 during Processive Motion Revealed by
Interferometric Scattering Microscopy. eLife 2015, 4, e05413.
(135) Mickolajczyk, K. J.; Geyer, E. A.; Kim, T.; Rice, L. M.; Hancock,
W. O. Direct Observation of Individual Tubulin Dimers Binding to
Growing Microtubules. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2019, 116, 7314−
7322.
(136) Taylor, R. W.; Mahmoodabadi, R. G.; Rauschenberger, V.;
Giessl, A.; Schambony, A.; Sandoghdar, V. Interferometric Scattering
Microscopy Reveals Microsecond Nanoscopic Protein Motion on a
Live Cell Membrane. Nat. Photonics 2019, 13, 480−487.
(137) de Wit, G.; Albrecht, D.; Ewers, H.; Kukura, P. Revealing
Compartmentalized Diffusion in Living Cells with Interferometric
Scattering Microscopy. Biophys. J. 2018, 114, 2945−2950.
(138) Taylor, R. W.; Holler, C.; Mahmoodabadi, R. G.; Ku ̈ppers, M.;
Dastjerdi, H. M.; Zaburdaev, V.; Schambony, A.; Sandoghdar, V. High-
Precision Protein-Tracking With Interferometric Scattering Micros-
copy. Front. Cell Dev. Biol. 2020, 8, 590158.
(139) Krishnan, M.; Mojarad, N.; Kukura, P.; Sandoghdar, V.
Geometry-Induced Electrostatic Trapping of Nanometric Objects in a
Fluid. Nature 2010, 467, 692−695.
(140) Mahmoodabadi, R. G.; Taylor, R. W.; Kaller, M.; Spindler, S.;
Sandoghdar, V. The Point Spread Function in Interferometric
Scattering Microscopy (ISCAT). I. Aberrations in Defocusing and
Axial Localization. Opt. Express 2020, 28, 25969−25988.
(141) Lee, I.-B.; Moon, H.-M.; Park, J.-S.; Zambochova, K.; Hong, S.-
C.; Cho, M. Three-Dimensional Interferometric Scattering Microscopy
via Remote Focusing Technique. Opt. Lett. 2020, 45, 2628−2631.
(142) Cohen, A. E.; Moerner, W. E. Method for Trapping and
Manipulating Nanoscale Objects in Solution. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2005, 86,
093109.
(143) Wang, Q.; Goldsmith, R. H.; Jiang, Y.; Bockenhauer, S. D.;
Moerner, W. E. Probing Single Biomolecules in Solution Using the
Anti-Brownian Electrokinetic (ABEL) Trap. Acc. Chem. Res. 2012,
45,
1955−1964.
(144) Squires, A. H.; Lavania, A. A.; Dahlberg, P. D.; Moerner, W. E.
Interferometric Scattering Enables Fluorescence-Free Electrokinetic
Trapping of Single Nanoparticles in Free Solution. Nano Lett. 2019, 19,
4112−4117.
(145) Mojarad, N.; Sandoghdar, V.; Krishnan, M. Measuring Three-
Dimensional Interaction Potentials Using Optical Interference. Opt.
Express 2013, 21, 9377−9389.
(146) Tae Kim, J.; Spindler, S.; Sandoghdar, V. Scanning-Aperture
Trapping and Manipulation of Single Charged Nanoparticles. Nat.
Commun. 2014, 5, 3380.
(147) Tuna, Y.; Kim, J. T.; Liu, H. W.; Sandoghdar, V. Levitated
Plasmonic Nanoantennas in an Aqueous Environment. ACS Nano
2017, 11, 7674−7678.
Chemical Reviews pubs.acs.org/CR Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.1c00271
Chem. Rev. XXXX, XXX, XXX −XXX
AC


===== PDF PAGE 30 =====

(148) Eberle, P.; Höller, C.; Mu ̈ller, P.; Suomalainen, M.; Greber, U.
F.; Eghlidi, H.; Poulikakos, D. Single Entity Resolution Valving of
Nanoscopic Species in Liquids. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2018, 13, 578−582.
(149) Skaug, M. J.; Schwemmer, C.; Fringes, S.; Rawlings, C. D.;
Knoll, A. W. Nanofluidic Rocking Brownian Motors. Science 2018, 359,
1505−1508.
(150) Goldfain, A. M.; Garmann, R. F.; Jin, Y.; Lahini, Y.; Manoharan,
V. N. Dynamic Measurements of the Position, Orientation, and DNA
Content of Individual Unlabeled Bacteriophages.J. Phys. Chem. B 2016,
120, 6130−6138.
(151) Garmann, R. F.; Goldfain, A. M.; Manoharan, V. N.
Measurements of the Self-Assembly Kinetics of Individual Viral
Capsids around Their RNA Genome. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.
2019, 116, 22485−22490.
(152) Andrecka, J.; Ortega Arroyo, J.; Lewis, K.; Cross, R. A.; Kukura,
P. Label-Free Imaging of Microtubules with Sub-Nm Precision Using
Interferometric Scattering Microscopy. Biophys. J. 2016, 110, 214−217.
(153) Lee, I.-B. B.; Moon, H.-M. M.; Joo, J.-H. H.; Kim, K.-H. H.;
Hong, S.-C. C.; Cho, M. Interferometric Scattering Microscopy with
Polarization-Selective Dual Detection Scheme: Capturing the Orienta-
tional Information of Anisotropic Nanometric Objects. ACS Photonics
2018, 5, 797−804.
(154) Vala, M.; Bujak, Ł.; García Marín, A.; Holanová, K.; Henrichs,
V.; Braun, M.; Lánsky ́, Z.; Piliarik, M. Nanoscopic Structural
Fluctuations of Disassembling Microtubules Revealed by Label Free
Super Resolution Microscopy. Small Methods 2021, 5, 2000985.
(155) Tala ̀, L.; Fineberg, A.; Kukura, P.; Persat, A. Pseudomonas
Aeruginosa Orchestrates Twitching Motility by Sequential Control of
Type IV Pili Movements. Nat. Microbiol. 2019, 4, 774−780.
(156) De Wit, G.; Danial, J. S. H.; Kukura, P.; Wallace, M. I. Dynamic
Label-Free Imaging of Lipid Nanodomains.Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.
2015, 112, 12299−12303.
(157) Andrecka, J.; Spillane, K. M.; Ortega-Arroyo, J.; Kukura, P.
Direct Observation and Control of Supported Lipid Bilayer Formation
with Interferometric Scattering Microscopy. ACS Nano 2013, 7,
10662−10670.
(158) Ortega-Arroyo, J.; Bissette, A. J.; Kukura, P.; Fletcher, S. P.
Visualization of the Spontaneous Emergence of a Complex, Dynamic,
and Autocatalytic System. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2016, 113,
11122−11126.
(159) Lebedeva, M. A.; Palmieri, E.; Kukura, P.; Fletcher, S. P.
Emergence and Rearrangement of Dynamic Supramolecular Aggre-
gates Visualized by Interferometric Scattering Microscopy. ACS Nano
2020, 14, 11160−11168.
(160) Engwerda, A. H. J.; Southworth, J.; Lebedeva, M. A.; Scanes, R.
J. H.; Kukura, P.; Fletcher, S. P. Coupled Metabolic Cycles Allow Out-
of-Equilibrium Autopoietic Vesicle Replication. Angew. Chem. 2020,
132, 20541−29546.
(161) Stetefeld, J.; McKenna, S. A.; Patel, T. R. Dynamic Light
Scattering: A Practical Guide and Applications in Biomedical Sciences.
Biophys. Rev. 2016, 8, 409−427.
(162) Falke, S.; Betzel, C. Dynamic Light Scattering (DLS). In
Radiation in Bioanalysis ; Nature Publishing Group, 2019; Vol. 8,p p
173−193. .
(163) McDonald, M. P.; Gemeinhardt, A.; König, K.; Piliarik, M.;
Schaffer, S.; Völkl, S.; Aigner, M.; Mackensen, A.; Sandoghdar, V.
Visualizing Single-Cell Secretion Dynamics with Single-Protein
Sensitivity. Nano Lett. 2018, 18, 513−519.
(164) Gemeinhardt, A.; McDonald, M. P.; König, K.; Aigner, M.;
Mackensen, A.; Sandoghdar, V. Label-Free Imaging of Single Proteins
Secreted from Living Cells via Iscat Microscopy.J. Visualized Exp. 2018,
2018, 58486.
(165) McMeekin, T. L.; Wilensky, M.; Groves, M. L. Refractive
Indices of Proteins in Relation to Amino Acid Composition and
Specific Volume. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 1962, 7, 151−156.
(166) Harpaz, Y.; Gerstein, M.; Chothia, C. Volume Changes on
Protein Folding. Structure 1994, 2, 641−649.
(167) Marklund, E. G.; Benesch, J. L. Weighing-up Protein Dynamics:
The Combination of Native Mass Spectrometry and Molecular
Dynamics Simulations. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 2019, 2019,5 0−58.
(168) Boeri Erba, E.; Signor, L.; Petosa, C. Exploring the Structure and
Dynamics of Macromolecular Complexes by Native Mass Spectrom-
etry. J. Proteomics 2020, 222, 103799.
(169) Robert, H. M. L.; Holanová, K.; Bujak, Ł.; Vala, M.; Henrichs,
V.; Lánský
, Z.; Piliarik, M. Fast Photothermal Spatial Light Modulation
for Quantitative Phase Imaging at the Nanoscale. Nat. Commun. 2021,
12, 2921.
(170) Hajdusits, B.; Suskiewicz, M. J.; Hundt, N.; Meinhart, A.;
Kurzbauer, R.; Leodolter, J.; Kukura, P.; Clausen, T. McsB Forms a
Gated Kinase Chamber to Mark Aberrant Bacterial Proteins for
Degradation. eLife 2021, 10, e63505.
(171) Bhatt, V.; Shi, K.; Salamango, D. J.; Moeller, N. H.; Pandey, K.
K.; Bera, S.; Bohl, T. E.; Kurniawan, F.; Orellana, K.; Zhang, W.; et al.
Structural Basis of Host Protein Hijacking in Human T-Cell Leukemia
Virus Integration. Nat. Commun. 2020, 11, 3121.
(172) England, R. M.; Moss, J. I.; Gunnarsson, A.; Parker, J. S.;
Ashford, M. B. Synthesis and Characterization of Dendrimer-Based
Polysarcosine Star Polymers: Well-Defined, Versatile Platforms
Designed for Drug-Delivery Applications. Biomacromolecules 2020,
21, 3332−3341.
(173) Fineberg, A.; Surrey, T.; Kukura, P. Quantifying the Monomer−
Dimer Equilibrium of Tubulin with Mass Photometry. J. Mol. Biol.
2020, 432, 6168−6172.
(174) Ye, X.; Vogt, M. S.; van der Does, C.; Bildl, W.; Schulte, U.;
Essen, L.-O.; Albers, S.-V. The Phosphatase PP2A Interacts With ArnA
and ArnB to Regulate the Oligomeric State and the Stability of the
ArnA/B Complex. Front. Microbiol. 2020, 11, 1849.
(175) Lonhienne, T.; Low, Y. S.; Garcia, M. D.; Croll, T.; Gao, Y.;
Wang, Q.; Brillault, L.; Williams, C. M.; Fraser, J. A.; McGeary, R. P.;
et al. Structures of Fungal and Plant Acetohydroxyacid Synthases.
Nature 2020, 586, 317−321.
(176) Li, Y.; Struwe, W. B.; Kukura, P. Single Molecule Mass
Photometry of Nucleic Acids. Nucleic Acids Res. 2020, 48, e97.
(177) Satapathy, S.; Dabbs, R. A.; Wilson, M. R. Rapid High-Yield
Expression and Purification of Fully Post-Translationally Modified
Recombinant Clusterin and Mutants. Sci. Rep. 2020, 10, 14243.
(178) Reikine, S.; Mclaughlin, S. H.; Modis, Y. Equilibrium Binding
Model for CpG DNA-Dependent Dimerization of Toll-like Receptor 9
Ectodomain. Biochemistry 2020, 59, 4155−4162.
(179) Fouët, G.; Bally, I.; Signor, L.; Häußermann, K.; Thielens, N.
M.; Rossi, V.; Gaboriaud, C. Headless C1q: A New Molecular Tool to
Decipher Its Collagen-like Functions. FEBS J. 2021, 288, 2030−2041.
(180) Dersch, S.; Reimold, C.; Stoll, J.; Breddermann, H.; Heimerl, T.;
Defeu Soufo, H. J.; Graumann, P. L. Polymerization of Bacillus Subtilis
MreB on a Lipid Membrane Reveals Lateral Co-Polymerization of
MreB Paralogs and Strong Effects of Cations on Filament Formation.
BMC Mol. Cell Biol. 2020, 21, 76.
(181) Malay, A. D.; Miyazaki, N.; Biela, A.; Chakraborti, S.;
Majsterkiewicz, K.; Stupka, I.; Kaplan, C. S.; Kowalczyk, A.; Piette, B.
M. A. G.; Hochberg, G. K. A.; et al. An Ultra-Stable Gold-Coordinated
Protein Cage Displaying Reversible Assembly. Nature 2019, 569, 438−
442.
(182) Tjondro, H. C.; Ugonotti, J.; Kawahara, R.; Chatterjee, S.;
Chen, S.; Soltermann, F.; Hinneburg, H.; Parker, B. L.;
Venkatakrishnan, V.; Loke, I.; et al. Hyper-Truncated Asn355- And
Asn391-Glycans Modulate the Activity of Neutrophil Granule
Myeloperoxidase. J. Biol. Chem. 2021, 296, 100144.
(183) Marcaida, M. J.; Kauzlaric, A.; Duperrex, A.; Su ̈lzle, J.;
Moncrieffe, M. C.; Adebajo, D.; Manley, S.; Trono, D.; Dal Peraro,
M. The Human RNA Helicase DDX21 Presents a Dimerization
Interface Necessary for Helicase Activity. iScience 2020, 23, 101811.
(184) Takada, H.; Roghanian, M.; Caballero-Montes, J.; Van Nerom,
K.; Jimmy, S.; Kudrin, P.; Trebini, F.; Murayama, R.; Akanuma, G.;
Garcia-Pino, A.; et al. Ribosome Association Primes the Stringent
Factor Rel for TRNA-Dependent Locking in the A-Site and Activation
of (p)PpGpp Synthesis. Nucleic Acids Res. 2021, 49, 444−457.
Chemical Reviews pubs.acs.org/CR Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.1c00271
Chem. Rev. XXXX, XXX, XXX −XXX
AD


===== PDF PAGE 31 =====

(185) Olerinyova, A.; Sonn-Segev, A.; Gault, J.; Eichmann, C.;
Schimpf, J.; Kopf, A. H.; Rudden, L. S. P.; Ashkinadze, D.; Bomba, R.;
Frey, L.; et al. Mass Photometry of Membrane Proteins. Chem. 2021, 7,
224−236.
(186) Wilk, P.; Kus ́ka, K.; Wa̧tor, E.; Małecki, P. H.; Wos ́, K.; Tokarz,
P.; Dubin, G.; Grudnik, P. Structural Characterization of Glycerol
Kinase from the Thermophilic Fungus Chaetomium Thermophilum.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 9570.
(187) Gunnarsson, A.; Stubbs, C. J.; Rawlins, P. B.; Taylor-Newman,
E.; Lee, W. C.; Geschwindner, S.; Hytönen, V.; Holdgate, G.; Jha, R.;
Dahl, G. Regenerable Biosensors for Small-Molecule Kinetic Character-
ization Using SPR. SLAS Discovery 2021, 26, 730−739.
(188) Wu, D.; Piszczek, G. Rapid Determination of Antibody-Antigen
Affinity by Mass Photometry. J. Visualized Exp. 2021, 168, No. e61784.
(189) Thabault, L.; Liberelle, M.; Koruza, K.; Yildiz, E.; Joudiou, N.;
Messens, J.; Brisson, L.; Wouters, J.; Sonveaux, P.; Frédérick, R.
Discovery of a Novel Lactate Dehydrogenase Tetramerization Domain
Using Epitope Mapping and Peptides. J. Biol. Chem. 2021, 296, 100422.
(190) Foley, E. D. B.; Kushwah, M. S.; Young, G.; Kukura, P. Label-
Free Tracking and Mass Measurement of Single Proteins on Lipid
Bilayers. bioRxiv 2021 , 2021.04.08.438951. DOI: 10.1101/
2021.04.08.438951.
(191) Heermann, T.; Steiert, F.; Ramm, B.; Hundt, N.; Schwille, P.
Mass-Sensitive Particle Tracking (MSPT) to Elucidate the Membrane-
Associated MinDE Reaction Cycle. bioRxiv 2021, 2021.04.08.438961.
DOI: 10.1101/2021.04.08.438961.
(192) Häußermann, K.; Young, G.; Kukura, P.; Dietz, H. Dissecting
FOXP2 Oligomerization and DNA Binding. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed.
2019, 58, 7662−7667.
(193) Hickman, A. B.; Kailasan, S.; Genzor, P.; Haase, A. D.; Dyda, F.
Casposase Structure and the Mechanistic Link between DNA
Transposition and Spacer Acquisition by CRISPR-Cas. eLife 2020, 9,
e50004.
(194) Sonn-Segev, A.; Belacic, K.; Bodrug, T.; Young, G.;
VanderLinden, R. T.; Schulman, B. A.; Schimpf, J.; Friedrich, T.; Dip,
P. V.; Schwartz, T. U.; et al. Quantifying the Heterogeneity of
Macromolecular Machines by Mass Photometry. Nat. Commun. 2020,
11, 1772.
(195) Wu, D.; Piszczek, G. Measuring the Affinity of Protein-Protein
Interactions on a Single-Molecule Level by Mass Photometry. Anal.
Biochem. 2020, 592, 113575.
(196) Soltermann, F.; Foley, E. D. B.; Pagnoni, V.; Galpin, M.;
Benesch, J. L. P.; Kukura, P.; Struwe, W. B. Quantifying Protein −
Protein Interactions by Molecular Counting with Mass Photometry.
Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2020, 59
, 10774−10779.
(197) Torres-Ocampo, A. P.; O ̈zden, C.; Hommer, A.; Gardella, A.;
Lapinskas, E.; Samkutty, A.; Esposito, E.; Garman, S. C.; Stratton, M.
M. Characterization of CaMKII α Holoenzyme Stability. Protein Sci.
2020, 29, 1524−1534.
(198) Tamara, S.; Franc, V.; Heck, A. J. R. A Wealth of Genotype-
Specific Proteoforms Fine-Tunes Hemoglobin Scavenging by Hapto-
globin. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2020, 117, 15554−15564.
(199) Avci, O.; U ̈nlü, N.; O ̈zkumur, A.; U ̈nlü, M. Interferometric
Reflectance Imaging Sensor (IRIS) A Platform Technology for
Multiplexed Diagnostics and Digital Detection. Sensors 2015, 15,
17649−17665.
(200) Özkumur, E.; Needham, J. W.; Bergstein, D. A.; Gonzalez, R.;
Cabodi, M.; Gershoni, J. M.; Goldberg, B. B.; U ̈nlü, M. S. Label-Free
and Dynamic Detection of Biomolecular Interactions for High-
Throughput Microarray Applications. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.
2008, 105, 7988−7992.
(201) Daaboul, G. G.; Yurt, A.; Zhang, X.; Hwang, G. M.; Goldberg, B.
B.; Ünlü, M. S. High-Throughput Detection and Sizing of Individual
Low-Index Nanoparticles and Viruses for Pathogen Identification.
Nano Lett. 2010, 10, 4727−4731.
(202) Sevenler, D.; Avci, O.; Ünlü, M. S. Quantitative Interferometric
Reflectance Imaging for the Detection and Measurement of Biological
Nanoparticles. Biomed. Opt. Express 2017, 8, 2976−2989.
(203) Sevenler, D.; Daaboul, G. G.; Ekiz Kanik, F.; Ünlü, N. L.; Ünlü,
M. S. Digital Microarrays: Single-Molecule Readout with Interfero-
metric Detection of Plasmonic Nanorod Labels. ACS Nano 2018, 12,
5880−5887.
(204) Daaboul, G. G.; Lopez, C. A.; Chinnala, J.; Goldberg, B. B.;
Connor, J. H.; U ̈nlü, M. S. Digital Sensing and Sizing of Vesicular
Stomatitis Virus Pseudotypes in Complex Media: A Model for Ebola
and Marburg Detection. ACS Nano 2014, 8, 6047−6055.
(205) Daaboul, G. G.; Freedman, D. S.; Scherr, S. M.; Carter, E.;
Rosca, A.; Bernstein, D.; Mire, C. E.; Agans, K. N.; Hoenen, T.;
Geisbert, T. W.; et al. Enhanced Light Microscopy Visualization of
Virus Particles from Zika Virus to Filamentous Ebolaviruses. PLoS One
2017, 12, No. e0179728.
(206) Daaboul, G. G.; Gagni, P.; Benussi, L.; Bettotti, P.; Ciani, M.;
Cretich, M.; Freedman, D. S.; Ghidoni, R.; Ozkumur, A. Y.; Piotto, C.;
et al. Digital Detection of Exosomes by Interferometric Imaging. Sci.
Rep. 2016, 6, 37246.
(207) Scherr, S. M.; Daaboul, G. G.; Trueb, J.; Sevenler, D.; Fawcett,
H.; Goldberg, B.; Connor, J. H.; U ̈nlü, M. S. Real-Time Capture and
Visualization of Individual Viruses in Complex Media. ACS Nano 2016,
10, 2827−2833.
(208) Scherr, S. M.; Freedman, D. S.; Agans, K. N.; Rosca, A.; Carter,
E.; Kuroda, M.; Fawcett, H. E.; Mire, C. E.; Geisbert, T. W.; Ünlü, M. S.;
et al. Disposable Cartridge Platform for Rapid Detection of Viral
Hemorrhagic Fever Viruses. Lab Chip 2017, 17, 917−925.
(209) Seymour, E.; Daaboul, G. G.; Zhang, X.; Scherr, S. M.; Ünlü,N .
L.; Connor, J. H.; Ünlü, M. S. DNA-Directed Antibody Immobilization
for Enhanced Detection of Single Viral Pathogens. Anal. Chem. 2015,
87, 10505−10512.
(210) Seymour, E.; Ünlü, N. L.; Carter, E. P.; Connor, J. H.; Ünlü,M .
S. Configurable Digital Virus Counter on Robust Universal DNA
Chips. ACS Sensors 2021, 6
, 229−237.
(211) Trueb, J. T.; Avci, O.; Sevenler, D.; Connor, J. H.; U ̈nlü,M .S .
Robust Visualization and Discri mination of Nano particles by
Interferometric Imaging. IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron. 2017,
23, 394−403.
(212) Aygun, U.; Urey, H.; Yalcin Ozkumur, A. Label-Free Detection
of Nanoparticles Using Depth Scanning Correlation Interferometric
Microscopy. Sci. Rep. 2019, 9, 9012.
(213) Yurdakul, C.; U ̈nlü, M. S. Computational Nanosensing from
Defocus in Single Particle Interferometric Reflectance Microscopy.Opt.
Lett. 2020, 45, 6546−6549.
(214) Tian, L.; Waller, L. Quantitative Differential Phase Contrast
Imaging in an LED Array Microscope. Opt. Express 2015, 23, 11394−
11403.
(215) Tian, L.; Li, X.; Ramchandran, K.; Waller, L. Multiplexed Coded
Illumination for Fourier Ptychography with an LED Array Microscope.
Biomed. Opt. Express 2014, 5, 2376−2389.
(216) Yurdakul, C.; Avci, O.; Matlock, A.; Devaux, A. J.; Quintero, M.
V.; Ozbay, E.; Davey, R. A.; Connor, J. H.; Karl, W. C.; Tian, L. High-
Throughput, High-Resolution Interferometric Light Microscopy of
Biological Nanoparticles. ACS Nano 2020, 14, 2002−2013.
(217) Monroe, M. R.; Daaboul, G. G.; Tuysuzoglu, A.; Lopez, C. A.;
Little, F. F.; Ünlü, M. S. Single Nanoparticle Detection for Multiplexed
Protein Diagnostics with Attomolar Sensitivity in Serum and
Unprocessed Whole Blood. Anal. Chem. 2013, 85, 3698−3706.
(218) Sevenler, D.; Trueb, J.; Ünlu, M. S. Beating the Reaction Limits
of Biosensor Sensitivity with Dynamic Tracking of Single Binding
Events. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2019, 116, 4129−4134.
(219) Huang, Y.-F.; Zhuo, G.-Y.; Chou, C.-Y.; Lin, C.-H.; Chang, W.;
Hsieh, C.-L. Coherent Brightfield Microscopy Provides the Spatio-
temporal Resolution To Study Early Stage Viral Infection in Live Cells.
ACS Nano 2017, 11, 2575−2585.
(220) Cheng, C.-Y.; Liao, Y.-H.; Hsieh, C.-L. High-Speed Imaging and
Tracking of Very Small Single Nanoparticles by Contrast Enhanced
Microscopy. Nanoscale 2019, 11, 568−577.
(221) Huang, Y. F.; Zhuo, G. Y.; Chou, C. Y.; Lin, C. H.; Hsieh, C. L.
Label-Free, Ultrahigh-Speed, 3D Observation of Bidirectional and
Chemical Reviews pubs.acs.org/CR Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.1c00271
Chem. Rev. XXXX, XXX, XXX −XXX
AE


===== PDF PAGE 32 =====

Correlated Intracellular Cargo Transport by Coherent Brightfield
Microscopy. Nanoscale 2017, 9, 6567−6574.
(222) Liedberg, B.; Nylander, C.; Lunström, I. Surface Plasmon
Resonance for Gas Detection and Biosensing. Sens. Actuators 1983, 4,
299−304.
(223) Fischer, B.; Heyn, S. P.; Egger, M.; Gaub, H. E. Antigen Binding
to a Pattern of Lipid-Anchored Antibody Binding Sites Measured by
Surface Plasmon Microscopy. Langmuir 1993, 9, 136−140.
(224) Berger, C. E. H.; Beumer, T. A. M.; Kooyman, R. P. H.; Greve, J.
Surface Plasmon Resonance Multisensing. Anal. Chem. 1998, 70, 703−
706.
(225) Ladd, J.; Taylor, A. D.; Piliarik, M.; Homola, J.; Jiang, S. Label-
Free Detection of Cancer Biomarker Candidates Using Surface
Plasmon Resonance Imaging. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 2009, 393, 1157−
1163.
(226) Liu, W.; Chen, Y.; Yan, M. Surface Plasmon Resonance Imaging
of Limited Glycoprotein Samples. Analyst 2008, 133, 1268−1273.
(227) Rebe Raz, S.; Bremer, M. G. E. G.; Giesbers, M.; Norde, W.
Development of a Biosensor Microarray towards Food Screening,
Using Imaging Surface Plasmon Resonance. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2008,
24, 552−557.
(228) Wong, C. L.; Ho, H. P.; Suen, Y. K.; Kong, S. K.; Chen, Q. L.;
Yuan, W.; Wu, S. Y. Real-Time Protein Biosensor Arrays Based on
Surface Plasmon Resonance Differential Phase Imaging. Biosens.
Bioelectron. 2008, 24, 606−612.
(229) Yuk, J. S.; Kim, H. S.; Jung, J. W.; Jung, S. H.; Lee, S. J.; Kim, W.
J.; Han, J. A.; Kim, Y. M.; Ha, K. S. Analysis of Protein Interactions on
Protein Arrays by a Novel Spectral Surface Plasmon Resonance
Imaging. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2006, 21, 1521−1528.
(230) Wegner, G. J.; Lee, H. J.; Marriott, G.; Corn, R. M. Fabrication
of Histidine-Tagged Fusion Protein Arrays for Surface Plasmon
Resonance Imaging Studies of Protein - Protein and Protein - DNA
Interactions. Anal. Chem. 2003, 75, 4740−4746.
(231) Jordan, C. E.; Frutos, A. G.; Thiel, A. J.; Corn, R. M. Surface
Plasmon Resonance Imaging Measurements of DNA Hybridization
Adsorption and Streptavidin/DNA Multilayer Formation at Chemi-
cally Modified Gold Surfaces. Anal. Chem. 1997, 69, 4939−
4947.
(232) Nelson, B. P.; Grimsrud, T. E.; Liles, M. R.; Goodman, R. M.;
Corn, R. M. Surface Plasmon Resonance Imaging Measurements of
DNA and RNA Hybridization Adsorption onto DNA Microarrays.
Anal. Chem. 2001, 73,1 −7.
(233) Mannelli, I.; Courtois, V.; Lecaruyer, P.; Roger, G.; Millot, M.
C.; Goossens, M.; Canva, M. Surface Plasmon Resonance Imaging
(SPRI) System and Real-Time Monitoring of DNA Biochip for Human
Genetic Mutation Diagnosis of DNA Amplified Samples. Sens.
Actuators, B 2006, 119, 583−591.
(234) Hayashi, G.; Hagihara, M.; Nakatani, K. Genotyping by Allele-
Specific l-DNA-Tagged PCR. J. Biotechnol. 2008, 135, 157−160.
(235) Li, Y.; Lee, H. J.; Corn, R. M. Fabrication and Characterization
of RNA Aptamer Microarrays for the Study of Protein-Aptamer
Interactions with SPR Imaging. Nucleic Acids Res. 2006, 34, 6416 −
6424.
(236) Nelson, B. P.; Liles, M. R.; Frederick, K. B.; Corn, R. M.;
Goodman, R. M. Label-Free Detection of 16S Ribosomal RNA
Hybridization on Reusable DNA Arrays Using Surface Plasmon
Resonance Imaging. Environ. Microbiol. 2002, 4, 735−743.
(237) Nelson, B. P.; Frutos, A. G.; Brockman, J. M.; Corn, R. M. Near-
Infrared Surface Plasmon Resonance Measurements of Ultrathin Films.
1. Angle Shift and SPR Imaging Experiments. Anal. Chem. 1999, 71,
3928−3934.
(238) Brockman, J. M.; Frutos, A. G.; Corn, R. M. A Multistep
Chemical Modification Procedure to Create Dna Arrays on Gold
Surfaces for the Study of Protein-DNA Interactions with Surface
Plasmon Resonance Imaging. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1999, 121, 8044−8051.
(239) Jeong, E. J.; Jeong, Y. S.; Park, K.; Yi, S. Y.; Ahn, J.; Chung, S. J.;
Kim, M.; Chung, B. H. Directed Immobilization of DNA-Binding
Proteins on a Cognate DNA-Modified Chip Surface.J. Biotechnol. 2008,
135,1 6−21.
(240) Homola, J.; Yee, S. S.; Gauglitz, G. Surface Plasmon Resonance
Sensors: Review. Sens. Actuators, B 1999, 54,3 −15.
(241) Homola, J. Surface Plasmon Resonance Sensors for Detection
of Chemical and Biological Species. Chem. Rev. 2008, 108, 462−493.
(242) Hinman, S. S.; McKeating, K. S.; Cheng, Q. Surface Plasmon
Resonance: Material and Interface Design for Universal Accessibility.
Anal. Chem.
2018, 90,1 9−39.
( 2 4 3 )G u o ,X .S u r f a c eP l a s m o nR e s o n a n c eB a s e dB i o s e n s o r
Technique: A Review. Journal of Biophotonics. 2012, 5, 483−501.
(244) Masson, J. F. Surface Plasmon Resonance Clinical Biosensors
for Medical Diagnostics. ACS Sensors. 2017, 2,1 6−30.
(245) Zeidan, E.; Kepley, C. L.; Sayes, C.; Sandros, M. G. Surface
Plasmon Resonance: A Label-Free Tool for Cellular Analysis.
Nanomedicine 2015, 10, 1833−1846.
(246) Stahelin, R. V. Surface Plasmon Resonance: A Useful
Technique for Cell Biologists to Characterize Biomolecular Inter-
actions. Mol. Biol. Cell 2013, 24, 883−886.
(247) Jung, L. S.; Campbell, C. T.; Chinowsky, T. M.; Mar, M. N.;
Yee, S. S. Quantitative Interpretation of the Response of Surface
Plasmon Resonance Sensors to Adsorbed Films. Langmuir 1998, 14,
5636−5648.
(248) Yeatman, E.; Ash, E. A. Surface Plasmon Microscopy. Electron.
Lett. 1987, 23, 1091−1092.
(249) Rothenhäusler, B.; Knoll, W. Surface-Plasmon Microscopy.
Nature 1988, 332, 615−617.
(250) Zhang, F.; Wang, S.; Yin, L.; Yang, Y.; Guan, Y.; Wang, W.; Xu,
H.; Tao, N. Quantification of Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor
Expression Level and Binding Kinetics on Cell Surfaces by Surface
Plasmon Resonance Imaging. Anal. Chem. 2015, 87, 9960−9965.
(251) Scarano, S.; Mascini, M.; Turner, A. P. F.; Minunni, M. Surface
Plasmon Resonance Imaging for Affinity-Based Biosensors. Biosens.
Bioelectron. 2010, 25, 957−966.
(252) Campbell, C. T.; Kim, G. SPR Microscopy and Its Applications
to High-Throughput Analyses of Biomolecular Binding Events and
Their Kinetics. Biomaterials 2007, 28, 2380−2392.
(253) Fasoli, J. B.; Corn, R. M. Surface Enzyme Chemistries for
Ultrasensitive Microarray Biosensing with SPR Imaging. Langmuir
2015,
31, 9527−9536.
(254) Hinman, S. S.; Ruiz, C. J.; Drakakaki, G.; Wilkop, T. E.; Cheng,
Q. On-Demand Formation of Supported Lipid Membrane Arrays by
Trehalose-Assisted Vesicle Delivery for SPR Imaging. ACS Appl. Mater.
Interfaces 2015, 7, 17122−17130.
(255) Manuel, G.; Lupták, A.; Corn, R. M. A Microwell-Printing
Fabrication Strategy for the On-Chip Templated Biosynthesis of
Protein Microarrays for Surface Plasmon Resonance Imaging. J. Phys.
Chem. C 2016, 120, 20984−20990.
(256) Huang, B.; Yu, F.; Zare, R. N. Surface Plasmon Resonance
Imaging Using a High Numerical Aperture Microscope Objective.Anal.
Chem. 2007, 79, 2979−2983.
(257) Kretschmann, E.; Raether, H. Radiative Decay of Non Radiative
Surface Plasmons Excited by Light. Z. Naturforsch., A: Phys. Sci. 1968,
23, 2135−2136.
(258) Orlowski, R.; Raether, H. The Total Reflection of Light at
Smooth and Rough Silver Films and Surface Plasmons. Surf. Sci. 1976,
54, 303−308.
(259) Jiang, Y.; Wang, W. Point Spread Function of Objective-Based
Surface Plasmon Resonance Microscopy. Anal. Chem. 2018, 90, 9650−
9656.
(260) Yu, H.; Shan, X.; Wang, S.; Chen, H.; Tao, N. Molecular Scale
Origin of Surface Plasmon Resonance Biosensors. Anal. Chem. 2014,
86, 8992−8997.
(261) Bozhevolnyi, S. I. Localization Phenomena in Elastic Surface-
Polariton Scattering Caused by Surface Roughness. Phys. Rev. B:
Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 1996, 54, 8177−8185.
(262) Bozhevolnyi, S. I.; Coello, V. Elastic Scattering of Surface
Plasmon Polaritons: Modeling and Experiment. Phys. Rev. B: Condens.
Matter Mater. Phys. 1998, 58, 10899−10910.
Chemical Reviews pubs.acs.org/CR Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.1c00271
Chem. Rev. XXXX, XXX, XXX −XXX
AF


===== PDF PAGE 33 =====

(263) Hecht, B.; Bielefeldt, H.; Novotny, L.; Inouye, Y.; Pohl, D. W.
Local Excitation, Scattering, and Interference of Surface Plasmons.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 1996, 77, 1889−1892.
(264) Berini, P. Long-Range Surface Plasmon Polaritons. Adv. Opt.
Photonics 2009, 1, 484−588.
(265) Kelly, K. L.; Coronado, E.; Zhao, L. L.; Schatz, G. C. The
Optical Properties of Metal Nanoparticles: The Influence of Size,
Shape, and Dielectric Environment. J. Phys. Chem. B 2003, 107, 668−
677.
(266) Becker, J.; Tru ̈gler, A.; Jakab, A.; Hohenester, U.; Sönnichsen,
C. The Optimal Aspect Ratio of Gold Nanorods for Plasmonic Bio-
Sensing. Plasmonics 2010, 5, 161−167.
(267) Zijlstra, P.; Paulo, P. M. R.; Orrit, M. Optical Detection of Single
Non-Absorbing Molecules Using the Surface Plasmon Resonance of a
Gold Nanorod. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2012, 7, 379−382.
(268) Ament, I.; Prasad, J.; Henkel, A.; Schmachtel, S.; Sönnichsen, C.
Single Unlabeled Protein Detection on Individual Plasmonic Nano-
particles. Nano Lett. 2012, 12, 1092−1095.
(269) Vecchi, G.; Giannini, V.; Gómez Rivas, J. Surface Modes in
Plasmonic Crystals Induced by Diffractive Coupling of Nanoantennas.
Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 2009, 80, 201401.
(270) Chen, P.; Chung, M. T.; McHugh, W.; Nidetz, R.; Li, Y.; Fu, J.;
Cornell, T. T.; Shanley, T. P.; Kurabayashi, K. Multiplex Serum
Cytokine Immunoassay Using Nanoplasmonic Biosensor Microarrays.
ACS Nano 2015, 9, 4173−4181.
(271) Li, X.; Soler, M.; O ̈zdemir, C. I.; Belushkin, A.; Yesilköy, F.;
Altug, H. Plasmonic Nanohole Array Biosensor for Label-Free and
Real-Time Analysis of Live Cell Secretion. Lab Chip 2017, 17, 2208−
2217.
(272) Guo, H.; Guo, J. Hybrid Plasmon Photonic Crystal Resonance
Grating for Integrated Spectrometer Biosensor. Opt. Lett. 2015, 40,
249−252.
(273) Seiler, S. T.; Rich, I. S.; Lindquist, N. C. Direct Spectral Imaging
of Plasmonic Nanohole Arrays for Real-Time Sensing. Nanotechnology
2016
, 27, 184001.
(274) Bockova, M.; Slaby, J.; Springer, T.; Homola, J. Advances in
Surface Plasmon Resonance Imaging and Microscopy and Their
Biological Applications. Annu. Rev. Anal. Chem. 2019, 12, 151−176.
(275) Zeng, Y.; Hu, R.; Wang, L.; Gu, D.; He, J.; Wu, S. Y.; Ho, H. P.;
Li, X.; Qu, J.; Gao, B. Z.; et al. Recent Advances in Surface Plasmon
Resonance Imaging: Detection Speed, Sensitivity, and Portability.
Nanophotonics 2017, 6, 1017−1030.
(276) Wong, C. L.; Olivo, M. Surface Plasmon Resonance Imaging
Sensors: A Review. Plasmonics 2014, 9, 809−824.
(277) Wang, S.; Shan, X.; Patel, U.; Huang, X.; Lu, J.; Li, J.; Tao, N.
Label-Free Imaging, Detection, and Mass Measurement of Single
Viruses by Surface Plasmon Resonance. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.
2010, 107, 16028−16032.
(278) Demetriadou, A.; Kornyshev, A. A. Principles of Nanoparticle
Imaging Using Surface Plasmons. New J. Phys. 2015, 17, 013041.
(279) Qian, C.; Wu, G.; Jiang, D.; Zhao, X.; Chen, H. B.; Yang, Y.; Liu,
X. W. Identification of Nanoparticles via Plasmonic Scattering
Interferometry. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2019, 58, 4217−4220.
(280) Yang, Y.; Yu, H.; Shan, X.; Wang, W.; Liu, X.; Wang, S.; Tao, N.
Label-Free Tracking of Single Organelle Transportation in Cells with
Nanometer Precision Using a Plasmonic Imaging Technique. Small
2015, 11, 2878−2884.
(281) Yu, H.; Shan, X.; Wang, S.; Chen, H.; Tao, N. Plasmonic
Imaging and Detection of Single DNA Molecules. ACS Nano 2014, 8,
3427−3433.
(282) Syal, K.; Iriya, R.; Yang, Y.; Yu, H.; Wang, S.; Haydel, S. E.;
Chen, H. Y.; Tao, N. Antimicrobial Susceptibility Test with Plasmonic
Imaging and Tracking of Single Bacterial Motions on Nanometer Scale.
ACS Nano 2016, 10, 845−852.
(283) Wang, W.; Wang, S.; Liu, Q.; Wu, J.; Tao, N. Mapping Single-
Cell-Substrate Interactions by Surface Plasmon Resonance Micros-
copy. Langmuir 2012, 28, 13373−13379.
(284) Toma, K.; Kano, H.; Offenhäusser, A. Label-Free Measurement
of Cell-Electrode Cleft Gap Distance with High Spatial Resolution
Surface Plasmon Microscopy. ACS Nano 2014, 8
, 12612−12619.
(285) Yang, C. T.; Méjard, R.; Griesser, H. J.; Bagnaninchi, P. O.;
Thierry, B. Cellular Micromotion Monitored by Long-Range Surface
Plasmon Resonance with Optical Fluctuation Analysis. Anal. Chem.
2015, 87, 1456−1461.
(286) Zhou, X.; Yang, Y.; Wang, S.; Liu, X. Surface Plasmon
Resonance Microscopy: From Single Molecule Sensing to Single Cell
Imaging. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2020, 59, 1776−1785.
(287) Foley, K. J.; Shan, X.; Tao, N. J. Surface Impedance Imaging
Technique. Anal. Chem. 2008, 80, 5146−5151.
(288) Yuan, L.; Tao, N.; Wang, W. Plasmonic Imaging of
Electrochemical Impedance. Annu. Rev. Anal. Chem. 2017, 10, 183 −
200.
(289) Liang, W.; Wang, S.; Festa, F.; Wiktor, P.; Wang, W.; Magee,
M.; Labaer, J.; Tao, N. Measurement of Small Molecule Binding
Kinetics on a Protein Microarray by Plasmonic-Based Electrochemical
Impedance Imaging. Anal. Chem. 2014, 86, 9860−9865.
(290) Macgriff, C.; Wang, S.; Wiktor, P.; Wang, W.; Shan, X.; Tao, N.
Charge-Based Detection of Small Molecules by Plasmonic-Based
Electrochemical Impedance Microscopy. Anal. Chem. 2013, 85, 6682−
6687.
(291) Halpern, A. R.; Wood, J. B.; Wang, Y.; Corn, R. M. Single-
Nanoparticle Near-Infrared Surface Plasmon Resonance Microscopy
for Real-Time Measurements of DNA Hybridization Adsorption. ACS
Nano 2014, 8, 1022−1030.
(292) Shan, X.; Fang, Y.; Wang, S.; Guan, Y.; Chen, H. Y.; Tao, N.
Detection of Charges and Molecules with Self-Assembled Nano-
Oscillators. Nano Lett. 2014, 14, 4151−4157.
(293) Fang, Y.; Chen, S.; Wang, W.; Shan, X.; Tao, N. Real-Time
Monitoring of Phosphorylation Kinetics with Self-Assembled Nano-
Oscillators. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2015, 54, 2538−2542.
(294) Chen, Z.; Peng, Y.; Cao, Y.; Wang, H.; Zhang, J. R.; Chen, H. Y.;
Zhu, J. J. Light-Driven Nano-Oscillators for Label-Free Single-
Molecule Monitoring of MicroRNA. Nano Lett. 2018, 18, 3759−3765.
(295) Ma, G.; Wan, Z.; Yang, Y.; Zhang, P.; Wang, S.; Tao, N. Optical
Imaging of Single-Protein Size, Charge, Mobility, and Binding. Nat.
Commun. 2020, 11, 4758.
(296) Kano, H.; Knoll, W. A Scanning Microscope Employing
Localized Surface-Plasmon-P olaritons as a Sensing Probe. Opt.
Commun. 2000, 182,1 1−15.
(297) Watanabe, K.; Horiguchi, N.; Kano, H. Optimized Measure-
ment Probe of the Localized Surface Plasmon Microscope by Using
Radially Polarized Illumination. Appl. Opt. 2007, 46, 4985−4990.
(298) Watanabe, K.; Ryosuke, M.; Terakado, G.; Okazaki, T.;
Morigaki, K.; Kano, H. High Resolution Imaging of Patterned Model
Biological Membranes by Localized Surface Plasmon Microscopy.Appl.
Opt. 2010, 49, 887−891.
(299) Kuai, Y.; Chen, J.; Tang, X.; Xiang, Y.; Lu, F.; Kuang, C.; Xu, L.;
Shen, W.; Cheng, J.; Gui, H. Label-Free Surface-Sensitive Photonic
Microscopy with High Spatial Resolution Using Azimuthal Rotation
Illumination. Sci. Adv. 2019, 5, eaav5335.
(300) Banville, F. A.; Söllradl, T.; Zermatten, P.-J.; Grandbois, M.;
Charette, P. G. Improved Resolution in SPR and MCWG Microscopy
by Combining Images Acquired with Distinct Mode Propagation
Directions. Opt. Lett. 2015, 40, 1165-1168.
(301) Son, T.; Lee, C.; Seo, J.; Choi, I.-H.; Kim, D. Surface Plasmon
Microscopy by Spatial Light Switching for Label-Free Imaging with
Enhanced Resolution. Opt. Lett. 2018, 43, 959−962.
(302) Tan, H. M.; Pechprasarn, S.; Zhang, J.; Pitter, M. C.; Somekh,
M. G. High Resolution Quantitative Angle-Scanning Widefield Surface
Plasmon Microscopy. Sci. Rep. 2016, 6, 20195.
(303) Tang, W. T.; Chung, E.; Kim, Y.-H.; So, P. T. C.; Sheppard, C. J.
R. Investigation of the Point Spread Function of Surface Plasmon-
Coupled Emission Microscopy. Opt. Express 2007, 15, 4634−4646.
(304) Tang, W. T.; Chung, E.; Kim, Y.-H.; So, P. T.; Sheppard, C. J.
Surface-Plasmon-Coupled Emission Microscopy with a Spiral Phase
Plate. Opt. Lett. 2010, 35, 517−519.
Chemical Reviews pubs.acs.org/CR Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.1c00271
Chem. Rev. XXXX, XXX, XXX −XXX
AG


===== PDF PAGE 34 =====

(305) Chen, Y.; Zhang, D.; Han, L.; Rui, G.; Wang, X.; Wang, P.;
Ming, H. Surface-Plasmon-Coupled Emission Microscopy with a
Polarization Converter. Opt. Lett. 2013, 38, 736−738.
(306) Zhang, P.; Ma, G.; Dong, W.; Wan, Z.; Wang, S.; Tao, N.
Plasmonic Scattering Imaging of Single Proteins and Binding Kinetics.
Nat. Methods 2020, 17, 1010−1017.
(307) Zhang, P.; Ma, G.; Wan, Z.; Wang, S. Quantification of Single-
Molecule Protein Binding Kinetics in Complex Media with Prism-
Coupled Plasmonic Scattering Imaging.ACS Sens. 2021, 6, 1357−1366.
(308) Yu, H.; Shan, X.; Wang, S.; Tao, N. Achieving High Spatial
Resolution Surface Plasmon Resonance Microscopy with Image
Reconstruction. Anal. Chem. 2017, 89, 2704−2707.
(309) Yang, Y.; Shen, G.; Wang, H.; Li, H.; Zhang, T.; Tao, N.; Ding,
X.; Yu, H. Interferometric Plasmonic Imaging and Detection of Single
Exosomes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2018, 115, 10275−10280.
(310) Sung, J.; Schnedermann, C.; Ni, L.; Sadhanala, A.; Chen, R. Y.
S.; Cho, C.; Priest, L.; Lim, J. M.; Kim, H. K.; Monserrat, B.; et al. Long-
Range Ballistic Propagation of Carriers in Methylammonium Lead
Iodide Perovskite Thin Films. Nat. Phys. 2020, 16, 171−176.
(311) Delor, M.; Weaver, H. L.; Yu, Q. Q.; Ginsberg, N. S. Imaging
Material Functionality through Three-Dimensional Nanoscale Track-
ing of Energy Flow. Nat. Mater. 2020, 19,5 6−62.
(312) Merryweather, A. J.; Schnedermann, C.; Jacquet, Q.; Grey, C.
P.; Rao, A. Operando Optical Tracking of Single-Particle Ion Dynamics
and Phase Transitions in Batteries. Nature 2021, 594, 522−528.
(313) Bai, Y.; Yin, J.; Cheng, J.-X. Bond-Selective Imaging by Optically
Sensing the Mid-Infrared Photothermal Effect. Sci. Adv. 2021, 7,
No. eabg1559.
(314) Zhang, D.; Li, C.; Zhang, C.; Slipchenko, M. N.; Eakins, G.;
Cheng, J.-X. Depth-Resolved Mid-Infrared Photothermal Imaging of
Living Cells and Organisms with Submicrometer Spatial Resolution.
Sci. Adv. 2016, 2, No. e1600521.
(315) Li, Z.; Aleshire, K.; Kuno, M.; Hartland, G. V. Super-Resolution
Far-Field Infrared Imaging by Photothermal Heterodyne Imaging. J.
Phys. Chem. B 2017, 121
, 8838−8846.
(316) Bai, Y.; Zhang, D.; Lan, L.; Huang, Y.; Maize, K.; Shakouri, A.;
Cheng, J.-X. Ultrafast Chemical Imaging by Widefield Photothermal
Sensing of Infrared Absorption. Sci. Adv. 2019, 5, No. eaav7127.
(317) Pavlovetc, I. M.; Podshivaylov, E. A.; Chatterjee, R.; Hartland,
G. V.; Frantsuzov, P. A.; Kuno, M. Infrared Photothermal Heterodyne
Imaging: Contrast Mechanism and Detection Limits. J. Appl. Phys.
2020, 127, 165101.
(318) Zhang, Y.; Yurdakul, C.; Devaux, A. J.; Wang, L.; Xu, X. G.;
Connor, J. H.; U ̈nlü, M. S.; Cheng, J.-X. Vibrational Spectroscopic
Detection of a Single Virus by Mid-Infrared Photothermal Microscopy.
Anal. Chem. 2021, 93, 4100−4107.
Chemical Reviews pubs.acs.org/CR Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.1c00271
Chem. Rev. XXXX, XXX, XXX −XXX
AH
