

===== PDF PAGE 1 =====

materials
Review
Hyperspectral-Enhanced Dark Field Microscopy for
Single and Collective Nanoparticle Characterization
in Biological Environments
Paula Zamora-Perez †, Dionysia Tsoutsi *,†, Ruixue Xu and Pilar Rivera_Gil * ID
Integrative Biomedical Materials and Nanomedicine Lab, Department of Experimental and Health
Sciences (DCEXS), Pompeu Fabra University (UPF), PRBB, Barcelona 08003, Spain;
paula.zamora@upf.edu (P .Z.-P .); ruixue.xu01@estudiant.upf.edu (R.X.)
* Correspondence: dionysia.tsoutsi@upf.edu (D.T.); pilar.rivera@upf.edu (P .R._G.);
Tel.: +34-933160918 (D.T. & P .R._G.)
† These authors contributed equally to this work.
Received: 18 December 2017; Accepted: 31 January 2018; Published: 6 February 2018
Abstract: We review how the hyperspectral dark ﬁeld analysis gives us quantitative insights into the
manner that different nanoscale materials interact with their environment and how this relationship is
directly expressed in an optical readout. We engage classiﬁcation tools to identify dominant spectral
signatures within a scene or to qualitatively characterize nanoparticles individually or in populations
based on their composition and morphology. Moreover, we follow up the morphological evolution of
nanoparticles over time and in different biological environments to better understand and establish a
link between the observed nanoparticles’ changes and cellular behaviors.
Keywords: single-particle tracking; hyperspectral analysis of nanoparticles evolution; protein corona;
colloidal stability; living organisms; scattering; correlating physicochemical properties with biological
responses; enhanced dark ﬁeld imaging
1. Hyperspectral-Enhanced Dark Field Microscopy (HEDFM)
1.1. Dark Field Microscopy and Hyperspectral Imaging—A Brief Introduction
Dark ﬁeld microscopy anchored with hyperspectral imagery (HSI) is a novel optical approach
with great potential in bio-related disciplines because it allows the identiﬁcation and quantitative
determination of speciﬁc components in the biological milieu. The optical approaches are universally
employed methods as they offer a direct and reliable observation, however, they are limited by the
resolution of the optical system [1]. Bright ﬁeld optics rely on the transmitted light illumination, which
is ideal for objects that absorb light against a non-absorbing background. This optical modality
contemplates the reﬂected and transmitted light leading to a low optical resolution, decreased
signal-to-noise ratios, and out-of-focus appearance of the sample. On the contrary, dark ﬁeld
microscopy contemplates only the incoming reﬂected light from the sample, thus eliminating the
background noise [2]. Dark ﬁeld microscopy provides a high contrast suitable for the observation of
low-contrast objects, usually not visible by conventional bright ﬁeld microscopy. It is based on the
indirect illumination of the specimen and, upon interaction with the sample, collects only the reﬂected
or elastically scattered light [3]. A specially sized disc blocks the illumination so that only oblique rays
strike the sample, permitting the distinguishable visualization of objects with similar refractive indexes
as the background. The latter characteristic is of interest especially for the microscopic examination of
biological samples without contrast agents [4].
HSI is a powerful multitool expanding into the realm of biological and medical sciences, which
holds a proven record of success in astronomy, geosciences, agriculture, surveillance, resource
Materials 2018, 11, 243; doi:10.3390/ma11020243 www.mdpi.com/journal/materials

===== PDF PAGE 2 =====

Materials 2018, 11, 243 2 of 13
management, and environmental monitoring, among other applications. HSI yields a hyperdata
cube with continuous spectral and spatial information in one measurement, engaging non-contact and
remote sensing. Moreover, this method is sensitive to subtle spectral changes ensuring a thorough
discrimination of chemical or biological entities, or tracking agents ' changes over time [ 5]. The
combination of the spatial-scanning hyperspectral imaging methodology with dark ﬁeld microscopy is
considered highly advantageous for optical studies of nanoscale materials. Although both HSI systems
and dark ﬁeld microscopy have been widespread methods for years, it was only recently that the
combination of these two methods emerged in one single modality.
1.2. Instrumentation and Advantages
HEDFM has a powerful resolving capability and is designed to provide in situ optical observation
and spectral characterization of a wide range of nanomaterials as they interact with both biological
and material-based matrixes, a key aspect for many bioanalytical applications. The unique interaction
between light and matter generates characteristic proﬁles of scattered light, serving as spectral
signatures for each target. Dark ﬁeld illumination based on an annular cardioid condenser and
highly collimated light at oblique angles on the sample, generates images with enhanced contrast and
signal-to-noise ratio up to ten times ( ×10) higher than the conventional dark ﬁeld optics [ 6,7]. The
instrumentation of the system consists of a visible-near infrared (vis-NIR) spectrophotometer attached
to a charge-coupled device (CCD) camera connected with the imaging port of the microscope. Figure 1
provides a generalized scheme of the system and the data acquisition device [ 8]. This technology
uses illumination from a tungsten–halogen light source capable to operate spectrally from 400 nm≤
λ ≤ 1000 nm, ∆λ < 4.69 nm, and with a diffraction-limited spatial resolution reaching a pixel size of
a few nanometers for the 100X objective [9]. The image collection along with the analysis software
provides evidence of the existence of nanoparticles (NPs) through the collection of all vis–near-infrared
(NIR) spectral data within each pixel of the scanned area, storing the unique spectral signatures of
the selected elements and forming a library database. Finally, the spectral signatures in the library
database can be tracked against newly scanned samples, thus permitting high-accuracy identiﬁcation
of the element.
Materials 2018, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW  2 of 13 
 
HSI is a powerful multitool expanding into the realm of biological and medical sciences, which 
holds a proven record of success in astronomy, ge osciences, agriculture, surveillance, resource 
management, and environmental monitoring, among other applications. HSI yields a hyperdata cube 
with continuous spectral and spatial informatio n in one measurement, engaging non-contact and 
remote sensing. Moreover, this method is sensitive to subtle spectral changes ensuring a thorough 
discrimination of chemical or bi ological entities, or tracking agents' changes over time [5]. The 
combination of the spatial-scanning hyperspectral imaging methodology with dark field microscopy 
is considered highly advantageous for optical st udies of nanoscale materials. Although both HSI 
systems and dark field microscopy have been wide spread methods for years, it was only recently 
that the combination of these two methods emerged in one single modality. 
1.2. Instrumentation and Advantages 
HEDFM has a powerful resolving capability and is designed to provide in situ optical 
observation and spectral characterization of a wide range of nanomaterials as they interact with both 
biological and material-based matrixes, a key aspect for many bioanalytical applications. The unique 
interaction between light and matter generates charac teristic profiles of scattered light, serving as 
spectral signatures for each target. Dark field il lumination based on an annular cardioid condenser 
and highly collimated light at oblique angles on the sample, generates images with enhanced contrast 
and signal-to-noise ratio up to ten times (×10) higher than the conventional dark field optics [6,7]. The 
instrumentation of the system consists of a visible-near infrared (vis-NIR) spectrophotometer 
attached to a charge-coupled device (CCD) camera connected with the imaging port of the 
microscope. Figure 1 prov ides a generalized scheme of the syst em and the data acquisition device 
[8]. This technology uses illumination from a tungsten–halogen light source capable to operate 
spectrally from 400 nm ≤ λ ≤ 1000 nm, Δλ < 4.69 nm, and with a diffraction-limited spatial resolution 
reaching a pixel size of a few nanometers for the 100X objective [9]. The image collection along with 
the analysis software provides evidence of the existence of nanoparticles (NPs) through the collection 
of all vis–near-infrared (NIR) spectral data within each pixel of the scanned area, storing the unique 
spectral signatures of the selected elements and forming a library database. Finally, the spectral 
signatures in the library database can be tracke d against newly scanned sa mples, thus permitting 
high-accuracy identification of the element. 
 
Figure 1.  Generalized diagram of the Hyperspectral- Enhanced Dark Field Microscopy (HEDFM) 
system. Schematic illustration of the experimental setup based on dark field optics coupled with the 
spectrograph (left), and on the acquisition of the hyperspectral data cube for the analysis (right). Each 
Figure 1. Generalized diagram of the Hyperspectral-Enhanced Dark Field Microscopy (HEDFM)
system. Schematic illustration of the experimental setup based on dark ﬁeld optics coupled with the
spectrograph (left), and on the acquisition of the hyperspectral data cube for the analysis (right). Each
pixel in the ﬁeld of view provides complete spectral information in the optical window ranging from
400 to 1000 nm [8]. This system was acquired from CytoViva, Inc. (Auburn, AL, USA).

===== PDF PAGE 3 =====

Materials 2018, 11, 243 3 of 13
HEDFM allows real-time analysis and can be successfully implemented in various biomedical
areas, for instance, bionanomaterials synthesis, nanodrug delivery, and nanotoxicology [10,11]. The
main advantages include the nondestructive nature of the method and the direct sample testing
with no need for processing steps prior to the analysis. A sensitive analysis is also possible because
HEDFM enables long-term studies in live cells and tissues even under ﬂow conditions mimicking the
blood circulation.
1.3. Image Acquisition and Hypercube Analysis
The hyperspectral data cube acquisition provides three-dimensional data with two spatial (x, y)
and one spectral (z) dimensions. The hyperspectral image thereby is considered the dark ﬁeld image
along with the spectral information associated with each pixel of the image. Different strategies may
be employed for the data cube acquisition, depending on the aimed resolution of the method. In
general, the commonly utilized methods in HSI from higher to lower resolution are: point mapping or
“whiskbroom”, line scanning or “pushbroom”, plane scanning or “staredown”, and the non-scanning
or “snapshot” method [ 5]. The image acquisition and data cube preprocessing for analysis involve
different phases until the formation of a spectral library of endmembers, regardless of the engaged
method [1,9]. Typically, the vis-NIR HSI systems engage mapping in a pushbroom fashion. The
hypercube is generated in time intervals of seconds or minutes, upon adjusting the exposure time.
Normally, a hypercube may contain hundreds of thousands of pixels with the size of a few
nanometers each. A raw hypercube includes unwanted information, nonresponsive pixels, and
spikes because of cosmic radiation that need to be carefully removed. Next, thresholding techniques
are employed to visualize the image background at a wavelength that ensures enough contrast
between the target and the background. Figure 2 summarizes the processes of the spectral endmember
selection in the ﬁeld of view [8]. Manual procedures allow the visualization of the spectral variability
within a sample by comparing single spectra. The spectral selection using a particle-ﬁltering tool
either accomplishes the mean spectral proﬁle of a targeted population or generates spectral-like
sub-populations classiﬁed by pixel size.
Materials 2018, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW  4 of 13 
 
 
Figure 2.  Workflow description of the data analysis  and mapping. The spectral library can be 
generated either manually by individual selectio n of the acquired spectral profiles or through 
automated processes using software tools. The endm embers of the spectral library are tracked into 
unknown data cubes. This allows identifying the nanomaterials within biol ogical matrixes. As a 
negative control for identification, cells unexpo sed to nanoparticles are mapped with the same 
spectral library [8]. 
In this review, we introduce the reader to how HEDFM can track interfacial changes at the level 
of individual and collective nanoparticles. Factors affecting the interface dispersant (NP)-dispersion 
medium are, for example, the composition of the medium, NPs’ stabilization procedure, NPs’ surface 
chemistry. This technique provides a tool to correlate changes in the physicochemical properties of 
colloidal nanoparticles caused by environmental (ionic strength, viscosity, pH, lyophility, cells) and 
non-environmental factors, such as the time, upon the identification of the corresponding spectral 
signatures.  
1.3.1. Optical Response of Multicomposite Nanoparticles  
High speed and reliable screening, localizat ion, and chemical identification of various 
components is the key in nanomedicine and biotechnology. Morphology and composition define the 
scattering properties of each compound which ar e then associated to a characteristic spectral 
signature. Figure 3 presents an example of HE DFM enabling the spectral differentiation of 
polystyrene nanoparticles (PS NPs) through the en capsulation of different cargoes (samples a–d). 
Bare PS NPs (to a lesser extent) (Figure 3a) and PS NPs loaded with rhodamine (RB) (Figure 3b) or 
quantum dots (QD) (Figure 3c) exhibited spectral variability among six individual NPs. This could 
be seen in the different spectral profiles associ ated to each NP, whereas PS loaded with methylene 
blue (MB) (Figure 3d) did not show interparticle variability. The insets are red-green-blue (RGB) 
images of the NPs according to their spectral profiles to highlight the presence of spectrally different 
subpopulations. The mean spectral profile of each sample is shown in Figure S1 (see supporting 
information). Variations in the composition or geometry can be reflected directly in the spectral 
readout of individual or collective NPs. From the mean spectral profiles of each sample, we could 
analyze the impact of the loading on NPs’ behavior (Figure S1). First, the reference spectra collected 
from the unloaded NPs showed a primary band around 600–630 nm, which was maintained across 
the samples (Figure 3a–d) regardless of the loading (Figure S1). When the NPs were loaded with the 
different cargoes, their scattering spectra, compared to the spectra of unloaded NPs, did not show a 
shift, indicating sample homogeneity and no interparticle variability. The subtle blue shifting (Figure 
S1) of the PS–RB could be associated to a slight r edispersion of the individual NPs. The appearance 
of the shoulder in the 500–550 nm region was asso ciated with the loading. The variability between 
the spectra of the six PS–RB NPs indicated that th e amount of RB loaded was not the same for each 
NP, permitting the spectral classification of PS NPs with a higher RB cargo. PS–QD spectral analysis 
did not show a specific trend (Figure 3c), indicating a different number of QDs per PS bead. QD 
loading produced enough changes on the physicochemical properties of the NPs to induce variations 
Figure 2. Workﬂow description of the data analysis and mapping. The spectral library can be generated
either manually by individual selection of the acquired spectral proﬁles or through automated processes
using software tools. The endmembers of the spectral library are tracked into unknown data cubes. This
allows identifying the nanomaterials within biological matrixes. As a negative control for identiﬁcation,
cells unexposed to nanoparticles are mapped with the same spectral library [8].
The region-of-interest (ROI) tool converts the selected pixels into a spectral library or endmember
collection ﬁle for the subsequent mapping analysis. The peak location classiﬁer detects the pixels in a
speciﬁc wavelength range allowing quantitative examination. For example, the size characterization
of spherical gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) is possible across a wide optical window. The image pixels

===== PDF PAGE 4 =====

Materials 2018, 11, 243 4 of 13
are analyzed in a desired wavelength range and are further classiﬁed upon their spectral responses.
Colors can be associated to each range for the ease of identiﬁcation of spectrally different nanoparticle
subpopulations or spectral changes in individual nanoparticles. The Spectral Angle Mapper (SAM) is
an automated mapping method acting as a threshold of spectral angle. The algorithm determines the
spectral similarity and provides information about the location and analogy of endmember pixels in
an input image. The spectral angle between the endmember and the image pixels deﬁnes the degree
of similarity between known and unknown pixels. The SAM classiﬁer is a powerful exploratory tool
enabling the investigation of a new scene.
In this review, we introduce the reader to how HEDFM can track interfacial changes at the level
of individual and collective nanoparticles. Factors affecting the interface dispersant (NP)-dispersion
medium are, for example, the composition of the medium, NPs’ stabilization procedure, NPs’ surface
chemistry. This technique provides a tool to correlate changes in the physicochemical properties
of colloidal nanoparticles caused by environmental (ionic strength, viscosity, pH, lyophility, cells)
and non-environmental factors, such as the time, upon the identiﬁcation of the corresponding
spectral signatures.
1.3.1. Optical Response of Multicomposite Nanoparticles
High speed and reliable screening, localization, and chemical identiﬁcation of various components
is the key in nanomedicine and biotechnology. Morphology and composition deﬁne the scattering
properties of each compound which are then associated to a characteristic spectral signature. Figure 3
presents an example of HEDFM enabling the spectral differentiation of polystyrene nanoparticles (PS
NPs) through the encapsulation of different cargoes (samples a–d). Bare PS NPs (to a lesser extent)
(Figure 3a) and PS NPs loaded with rhodamine (RB) (Figure 3b) or quantum dots (QD) (Figure 3c)
exhibited spectral variability among six individual NPs. This could be seen in the different spectral
proﬁles associated to each NP , whereas PS loaded with methylene blue (MB) (Figure 3d) did not
show interparticle variability. The insets are red-green-blue (RGB) images of the NPs according to
their spectral proﬁles to highlight the presence of spectrally different subpopulations. The mean
spectral proﬁle of each sample is shown in Figure S1 (see supporting information). Variations in the
composition or geometry can be reﬂected directly in the spectral readout of individual or collective
NPs. From the mean spectral proﬁles of each sample, we could analyze the impact of the loading
on NPs’ behavior (Figure S1). First, the reference spectra collected from the unloaded NPs showed a
primary band around 600–630 nm, which was maintained across the samples (Figure 3a–d) regardless
of the loading (Figure S1). When the NPs were loaded with the different cargoes, their scattering
spectra, compared to the spectra of unloaded NPs, did not show a shift, indicating sample homogeneity
and no interparticle variability. The subtle blue shifting (Figure S1) of the PS–RB could be associated to
a slight redispersion of the individual NPs. The appearance of the shoulder in the 500–550 nm region
was associated with the loading. The variability between the spectra of the six PS–RB NPs indicated
that the amount of RB loaded was not the same for each NP , permitting the spectral classiﬁcation of
PS NPs with a higher RB cargo. PS–QD spectral analysis did not show a speciﬁc trend (Figure 3c),
indicating a different number of QDs per PS bead. QD loading produced enough changes on the
physicochemical properties of the NPs to induce variations in the scattering proﬁles. This seems
feasible considering that RB and QDs are between 0.05 nm and 40 nm, respectively. This seems to be
a random process associated to an inhomogeneous distribution or loading of the QD within the PS
NPs. The highest impact on the spectral proﬁle of the PS NPs was registered upon MB loading. The
spectral shoulder completely disappeared, maintaining the main spectral band at 620 nm (Figure 3d).
Moreover, reproducible spectral proﬁles were collected for the PS–MB NPs, indicating homogeneous
MB cargo per PS NP . These results conﬁrmed that HEDFM can spectrally track the physicochemical
changes induced in nanoparticles.

===== PDF PAGE 5 =====

Materials 2018, 11, 243 5 of 13
Materials 2018, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW  5 of 13 
 
in the scattering profiles. This seems feasible considering that RB and QDs are between 0.05 nm and 
40 nm, respectively. This seems to be a random process associated to an inhomogeneous distribution 
or loading of the QD within the PS NPs. The highest impact on the spectral profile of the PS NPs was 
registered upon MB loading. The spectral should er completely disappeared, maintaining the main 
spectral band at 620 nm (Figure 3d). Moreover, repr oducible spectral profiles were collected for the 
PS–MB NPs, indicating homogeneous MB cargo per PS NP. These results confirmed that HEDFM can 
spectrally track the physicochemical changes induced in nanoparticles. 
 
Figure 3.  Six spectral profiles showing optical diffe rences among randomly selected PS NPs 
encapsulating different cargos. The insets correspond to dark field images of the NPs. (a) Bare PS NPs; 
(b) PS loaded with rhodamine (RB); ( c) PS loaded with quantum dots (QD); ( d) PS loaded with 
methylene blue (MB). The results were obtained using a CytoViva® with an Olympus UPlan FLN 60X 
1.25 N.A. oil objective, a tungsten–halogen lamp  as the illumination source, and a Pixelfly 
hyperspectral camera based on pushbroom line scanning. 
1.3.2. Tracking NPs’ Evolution at Different pH Values 
The surface of engineered nanoparticles synthe sized using bottom-up protocols is normally 
modified (e.g., coated with polymers) to provide colloidal stability in water-based media and to 
further functionalize the NP’s surface. The surface chemistry governs the interaction of the NPs with 
the environment (medium, cells, and other), therefore its nature defines the NPs’ optical response. In 
aqueous conditions, many protective coatings present sensitive functional groups for the electrostatic 
stabilization of the particles that are highly affected by pH. We engaged a detailed HEDFM analysis 
to examine these differences using gold-copper sulfide nanoparticles (AuCuS NPs) (Figures 4 and S2) 
[8]. Our results showed a narrowing and a subtle red shifting of the two main bands of the spectral 
signature of the AuCuS NPs at acidic pH compar ed to neutral pH. We estimated that the observed 
spectral changes were related to the protonation state of the protective polymer. The swelling–
shrinking behavior of polymers affects the local refractive index, thereby modifying the optical 
responses of the nanomaterials. 
 
Figure 3. Six spectral proﬁles showing optical differences among randomly selected PS NPs
encapsulating different cargos. The insets correspond to dark ﬁeld images of the NPs. ( a) Bare
PS NPs; (b) PS loaded with rhodamine (RB); ( c) PS loaded with quantum dots (QD); ( d) PS loaded
with methylene blue (MB). The results were obtained using a CytoViva ® with an Olympus UPlan
FLN 60X 1.25 N.A. oil objective, a tungsten–halogen lamp as the illumination source, and a Pixelﬂy
hyperspectral camera based on pushbroom line scanning.
1.3.2. Tracking NPs’ Evolution at Different pH Values
The surface of engineered nanoparticles synthesized using bottom-up protocols is normally
modiﬁed (e.g., coated with polymers) to provide colloidal stability in water-based media and to further
functionalize the NP’s surface. The surface chemistry governs the interaction of the NPs with the
environment (medium, cells, and other), therefore its nature deﬁnes the NPs’ optical response. In
aqueous conditions, many protective coatings present sensitive functional groups for the electrostatic
stabilization of the particles that are highly affected by pH. We engaged a detailed HEDFM analysis
to examine these differences using gold-copper sulﬁde nanoparticles (AuCuS NPs) (Figure 4 and
Figure S2) [8]. Our results showed a narrowing and a subtle red shifting of the two main bands of
the spectral signature of the AuCuS NPs at acidic pH compared to neutral pH. We estimated that
the observed spectral changes were related to the protonation state of the protective polymer. The
swelling–shrinking behavior of polymers affects the local refractive index, thereby modifying the
optical responses of the nanomaterials.
Materials 2018, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW  5 of 13 
 
in the scattering profiles. This seems feasible considering that RB and QDs are between 0.05 nm and 
40 nm, respectively. This seems to be a random process associated to an inhomogeneous distribution 
or loading of the QD within the PS NPs. The highest impact on the spectral profile of the PS NPs was 
registered upon MB loading. The spectral should er completely disappeared, maintaining the main 
spectral band at 620 nm (Figure 3d). Moreover, repr oducible spectral profiles were collected for the 
PS–MB NPs, indicating homogeneous MB cargo per PS NP. These results confirmed that HEDFM can 
spectrally track the physicochemical changes induced in nanoparticles. 
 
Figure 3.  Six spectral profiles showing optical diffe rences among randomly selected PS NPs 
encapsulating different cargos. The insets correspond to dark field images of the NPs. (a) Bare PS NPs; 
(b) PS loaded with rhodamine (RB); ( c) PS loaded with quantum dots (QD); ( d) PS loaded with 
methylene blue (MB). The results were obtained using a CytoViva® with an Olympus UPlan FLN 60X 
1.25 N.A. oil objective, a tungsten–halogen lamp  as the illumination source, and a Pixelfly 
hyperspectral camera based on pushbroom line scanning. 
1.3.2. Tracking NPs’ Evolution at Different pH Values 
The surface of engineered nanoparticles synthe sized using bottom-up protocols is normally 
modified (e.g., coated with polymers) to provide colloidal stability in water-based media and to 
further functionalize the NP’s surface. The surface chemistry governs the interaction of the NPs with 
the environment (medium, cells, and other), therefore its nature defines the NPs’ optical response. In 
aqueous conditions, many protective coatings present sensitive functional groups for the electrostatic 
stabilization of the particles that are highly affected by pH. We engaged a detailed HEDFM analysis 
to examine these differences using gold-copper sulfide nanoparticles (AuCuS NPs) (Figures 4 and S2) 
[8]. Our results showed a narrowing and a subtle red shifting of the two main bands of the spectral 
signature of the AuCuS NPs at acidic pH compar ed to neutral pH. We estimated that the observed 
spectral changes were related to the protonation state of the protective polymer. The swelling–
shrinking behavior of polymers affects the local refractive index, thereby modifying the optical 
responses of the nanomaterials. 
 
Figure 4. Spectral responses of AuCuS NPs at different pH values [8]. Mean spectral proﬁles of the
particles in neutral (orange line) and acidic (brown line) pH conditions. The insets correspond to the
dark ﬁeld images of the AuCuS NPs. CytoViva setup and ENVI software (Version 4.8) were used for
the hypercube acquisition and analysis.

===== PDF PAGE 6 =====

Materials 2018, 11, 243 6 of 13
1.3.3. Tracking NPs’ Changes Induced by the Solvent’s Ionic Strength and Composition
All optical processes, including the scattering of light, are heavily inﬂuenced by the properties of
the medium across the pathway of light. Biological environments are complex aqueous media rich
in enzymes, proteins, sugars, peptides, electrolytes, among other molecules affecting the properties
of the bulk in terms of ionic strength, viscosity, and refractive index. We wanted to study the impact
of the composition of the dispersion medium on the NPs, so we carried out a spectral analysis of
gold nanostars (AuNSs) in ethanol (EtOH) (a standard medium used for the storage of NPs) and
phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) (a standard medium used in bio-related applications). The generated
mean spectrum in ethanol showed a band located around 631 nm, while, in PBS, the band maximum
slightly redshifted to 645 nm (Figure 5a and Figure S3). This correlated with an increase in size due
to NP agglomeration caused by the high ionic strength of PBS that screened the charges. The insets
corresponding to the dark ﬁeld images of the NPs conﬁrmed the agglomeration of the sample. The
narrowing of the band could be associated with an increase in the sample homogeneity.
Next, we exposed plasmonic nanoparticles with different physicochemical properties compared
to the nanostars (around 80 nm) to ethanol and cell growing medium (GM), a more complex medium
with high ionic strength like the PBS and higher viscosity due to the presence of macromolecules.
To this end, we used polymeric hollow nanocapsules whose cavity was covered with discrete gold
nanoparticles (PM–AuNPs) (overall size 400 nm). Figure 5b shows the spectral proﬁles in both media.
The complex content of the GM altered the viscosity, ionic strength, and refractive index of the bulk,
generating a narrow and redshifted spectral band (Figure S4). The existing proteins affected the
dielectric constant of the bulk and interacted with the NPs, forming a protein corona [ 12] which
changed the size and the interfacial refractive index, ultimately resulting in different scattering proﬁles.
Materials 2018, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW  6 of 13 
 
Figure 4. Spectral responses of AuCuS NPs at different pH values [8]. Mean spectral profiles of the 
particles in neutral (orange line) and acidic (brown line) pH conditions. The insets correspond to the 
dark field images of the AuCuS NPs. CytoViva setup and ENVI software (Version 4.8) were used for 
the hypercube acquisition and analysis. 
1.3.3. Tracking NPs’ Changes Induced by the Solvent’s Ionic Strength and Composition 
All optical processes, including the scattering of light, are heavily influenced by the properties 
of the medium across the pathway of light. Biological environments are complex aqueous media rich 
in enzymes, proteins, sugars, peptides, electrolyt es, among other molecules affecting the properties 
of the bulk in terms of ionic strength, viscosity, and refractive index. We wanted to study the impact 
of the composition of the dispersion medium on the NPs, so we carried out a spectral analysis of gold 
nanostars (AuNSs) in ethanol (EtOH) (a standa rd medium used for the storage of NPs) and 
phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) (a standard medium used in bio-related applications). The generated 
mean spectrum in ethanol showed a band located around 631 nm, while, in PBS, the band maximum 
slightly redshifted to 645 nm (Figures 5a and S3). This correlated with an increase in size due to NP 
agglomeration caused by the high ionic strength of PBS that screened the charges. The insets 
corresponding to the dark field images of the NP s confirmed the agglomeration of the sample. The 
narrowing of the band could be associated with an increase in the sample homogeneity. 
Next, we exposed plasmonic nanoparticles with different physicochemical properties compared 
to the nanostars (around 80 nm) to ethanol and cell growing medium (GM), a more complex medium 
with high ionic strength like the PBS and higher viscosity due to the presence of macromolecules. To 
this end, we used polymeric hollow nanocapsules  whose cavity was covered with discrete gold 
nanoparticles (PM–AuNPs) (overall size 400 nm). Figure 5b shows the spectral profiles in both media. 
The complex content of the GM altered the viscosity, ionic strength, and refractive index of the bulk, 
generating a narrow and redshifted spectral band (Figure S4). The existing proteins affected the 
dielectric constant of the bulk and interacted wi th the NPs, forming a protein corona [12] which 
changed the size and the interfacial refractive inde x, ultimately resulting in different scattering 
profiles. 
 
Figure 5. Influence of the solvents’ ionic strength and composition. ( a) Spectral changes correlated 
with the agglomeration state of the AuNSs; ( b) prominent spectral change in GM resulting from the 
formation of the so-called protein corona arou nd the surface of the PM–AuNPs. AuNSs and PM–
AuNPs were synthesized in our lab following synthesis methods published elsewhere [13,14]. 
CytoViva setup and ENVI 4.8 software were used for the hypercube acquisition and analysis. 
1.3.4. Time Evolution of NPs Stored in Water or in a Biological Medium 
Figure 5. Inﬂuence of the solvents’ ionic strength and composition. ( a) Spectral changes correlated
with the agglomeration state of the AuNSs; ( b) prominent spectral change in GM resulting from
the formation of the so-called protein corona around the surface of the PM–AuNPs. AuNSs and
PM–AuNPs were synthesized in our lab following synthesis methods published elsewhere [ 13,14].
CytoViva setup and ENVI 4.8 software were used for the hypercube acquisition and analysis.
1.3.4. Time Evolution of NPs Stored in Water or in a Biological Medium
Plasmonic nanoparticles are well characterized and present large scattering cross sections arising
from their composition and morphology. They are the standards for HEDFM. In one of our recent
studies, we investigated the time-induced morphological alterations in plasmonic AuCuS NPs [ 8].

===== PDF PAGE 7 =====

Materials 2018, 11, 243 7 of 13
Figure 6 presents the evolution of AuCuS NPs after 2–3 months in water and cell GM. From the wide
mean spectral proﬁles of the NPs at t = 0 month (Figure 6a,c), we could conclude that the NPs per se
scattered the light differently. This can be associated to the anisotropic geometry of the NPs derived
from the non-concentric association of Au and CuS particles, two different materials with different
scattering cross sections. No obvious variations were observed when the NPs were dispersed in water
over time (Figure 6d). On the other hand, the spectral analysis of the NPs in GM, containing at least
10% of macromolecules like proteins, responsible for the formation of a protein corona around the
NPs’ surface, clearly discriminated between two spectral-like subpopulations with time (Figure 6b).
The shoulder in the 500-nm region probably arose from the redispersion of the NPs mediated by the
protein corona. At long term (see in Figure S5 the SI of the NPs in GM after 8 months), there was a
narrowing in the spectral proﬁle that slightly shifted to the red.
Materials 2018, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW  7 of 13 
 
Plasmonic nanoparticles are well characterized and present large scattering cross sections 
arising from their composition and morphology. They are the standards for HEDFM. In one of our 
recent studies, we investigated the time-induced morphological alterations in plasmonic AuCuS NPs 
[8]. Figure 6 presents the evolution of AuCuS NPs after 2–3 months in water and cell GM. From the 
wide mean spectral profiles of the NPs at t = 0 month (Figure 6a,c), we could conclude that the NPs 
per se scattered the light differently. This can be associated to the anisotropic geometry of the NPs 
derived from the non-concentric association of Au  and CuS particles, two different materials with 
different scattering cross sectio ns. No obvious variations were  observed when the NPs were 
dispersed in water over time (Figure 6d). On the other hand, the spectral analysis of the NPs in GM, 
containing at least 10% of macromolecules like proteins, responsible for the formation of a protein 
corona around the NPs’ surface, clearly discriminated between two spectral-like subpopulations with 
time (Figure 6b). The shoulder in the 500-nm region probably arose from the redispersion of the NPs 
mediated by the protein corona. At long term (see in Figure S5 the SI of the NPs in GM after 8 months), 
there was a narrowing in the spectral profile that slightly shifted to the red.  
 
Figure 6. Temporal tracking AuCuS NPs spectral changes induced by the solvent’s viscosity. HEDFM 
tracked the scattering profiles of NPs dispersed in water (non-viscous medium) and cell GM (viscous 
medium) over time. The plots represent the mean sp ectral profiles of different regions of interest 
(ROIs) containing the spectra of particles with the same pixel size. The number of pixels associated 
with one particle forms its pixel size. We sorted the particle populations by pixel size at different time 
points, i.e., t = 0 and t = 1, corresponding to the time of immediate addition of the solvent and the time 
after 2–3 months of storage, respectively in GM ( a) and ( b); and water ( c) and (d). In the SI (Figure 
S5), the evolution of the NPs after 8 months in GM is also shown [8]. 
1.3.5. Tracking NPs’ Evolution in the Intracellular Milieu  
HEDFM is an excellent tool for tracking spectral signatures in cell studies. The intracellular 
matrixes show a higher variation in chemical composition derived from the different cellular 
structures. Figure 7 shows the NPs behavior inside and outside cells (see detailed hyperspectral 
analysis of gold nanospheres alone and with cells in Figures S6, S7-A, and S7-B). The spectral profile 
of the cells compared to the AuNPs differs substantially, allowing optical and spectral differentiation. 
The spectral profile of the NPs in solution showed a band with a maximum located at 645 nm (Figure 
7b), while the cell spectrum presented a wide ba nd across the vis-NIR range (Figure 7d). The 
localization of the particles upon interaction with the cells was based on the different optical 
responses of the particles in the different compartm ents inside the cells. The latter can be translated 
in spectral shifts in the location of the band maxi ma at 633 nm (Figure 7e), 603 nm (Figure 7f), and 
582 nm (Figure 7g), compared to the band maximum of the particles in solution at 645 nm. The 
absence of a red shift indicated that the NPs did not agglomerate inside the cells [12].  
Figure 6. Temporal tracking AuCuS NPs spectral changes induced by the solvent’s viscosity. HEDFM
tracked the scattering proﬁles of NPs dispersed in water (non-viscous medium) and cell GM (viscous
medium) over time. The plots represent the mean spectral proﬁles of different regions of interest (ROIs)
containing the spectra of particles with the same pixel size. The number of pixels associated with one
particle forms its pixel size. We sorted the particle populations by pixel size at different time points,
i.e., t = 0 and t = 1, corresponding to the time of immediate addition of the solvent and the time after
2–3 months of storage, respectively in GM (a) and (b); and water (c) and (d). In the SI (Figure S5), the
evolution of the NPs after 8 months in GM is also shown [8].
1.3.5. Tracking NPs’ Evolution in the Intracellular Milieu
HEDFM is an excellent tool for tracking spectral signatures in cell studies. The intracellular
matrixes show a higher variation in chemical composition derived from the different cellular structures.
Figure 7 shows the NPs behavior inside and outside cells (see detailed hyperspectral analysis of
gold nanospheres alone and with cells in Figures S6, S7-A, and S7-B). The spectral proﬁle of the cells
compared to the AuNPs differs substantially, allowing optical and spectral differentiation. The spectral
proﬁle of the NPs in solution showed a band with a maximum located at 645 nm (Figure 7b), while
the cell spectrum presented a wide band across the vis-NIR range (Figure 7d). The localization of the
particles upon interaction with the cells was based on the different optical responses of the particles in
the different compartments inside the cells. The latter can be translated in spectral shifts in the location
of the band maxima at 633 nm (Figure 7e), 603 nm (Figure 7f), and 582 nm (Figure 7g), compared to
the band maximum of the particles in solution at 645 nm. The absence of a red shift indicated that the
NPs did not agglomerate inside the cells [12].

===== PDF PAGE 8 =====

Materials 2018, 11, 243 8 of 13
Materials 2018, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW  8 of 13 
 
 
Figure 7. Spectral behavior of Au nanospheres (100 nm) inside and outside a cell. (a) Dark field image 
of the NPs in solution; ( b) single spectral profile from on e particle randomly selected; ( c) dark field 
image of cells exposed to the NPs; (d) spectral signature of the cytoplasmic membrane; (e–g) particles 
showing different scattering behaviors in the intracellular milieu. All the plots show the RGB bars in 
which the dark field images are based. The hypers pectral images were acquired with the CytoViva 
setup and processed with ENVI 4.8 software. 
2. Biomedical Applications of HEDFM 
Tracking the evolution of bio-na nomaterials is crucial to preserve their functionality [15–17]. 
Biological matrixes such as body fluids or tissu es are considered more complex environments than 
the examples mentioned above. For instance, how NPs behave in the blood is key for nanomedicines 
designed for intravenous administration. Changes in the physicochemical properties of 
nanomaterials upon interaction with  body fluids and tissues alter the pharmacokinetic response in 
terms of the drug biological behavior and potential toxicity [18]. In this section, we present examples 
of HEDFM applications in biomedicine. 
Shannahan and co-workers studied the relation between nanoparticles and underlying diseases 
[19]. Atherosclerosis is associated with the capacity of macrophages to uptake cholesterol that leads 
to inflammation. Macrophages are also one of the first immune cells in charge of detecting and 
eliminating unidentified agents su ch as nanoparticles. Silver particles (AgNPs) and iron oxide 
particles (IONPs) may compete with cholesterol for the scavenger receptors that macrophages have 
on their surface, thus playing a key role in the metabolism and clearance of these different materials. 
To study the immune system interactions under cholesterol influence, the researchers used HEDFM 
to characterize the scattering properties of citrate-coated AgNPs of 20 and 110, and 20 nm 
polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP)-coated IONPs, in the presence or absence of cholesterol (Figure 8). The 
interaction between cholesterol and the surface of NPs alters the hydrodynamic size, the ζ-potential, 
and the optical properties. Specifically, it was observed an important redshift of the spectral 
responses of both 20 and 110 nm AgNPs upon inte raction with cholesterol. This shift could be 
correlated with changes in the refractive index of the nanoparticles resulting from cholesterol 
attachment. In the case of the PVP-coated IONPs, th e changes were less obvious, while the location 
of the band maximum was preserved, and a spectral  broadening occurred. It is worthy to say that 
both PVP and cholesterol but not citrate have sim ilar refractive indexes. This explains the higher 
differences in the scattering properties for the citrate-coated nanoparticles compared to the PVP-
Figure 7. Spectral behavior of Au nanospheres (100 nm) inside and outside a cell. (a) Dark ﬁeld image
of the NPs in solution; (b) single spectral proﬁle from one particle randomly selected; (c) dark ﬁeld
image of cells exposed to the NPs; (d) spectral signature of the cytoplasmic membrane; (e–g) particles
showing different scattering behaviors in the intracellular milieu. All the plots show the RGB bars in
which the dark ﬁeld images are based. The hyperspectral images were acquired with the CytoViva
setup and processed with ENVI 4.8 software.
2. Biomedical Applications of HEDFM
Tracking the evolution of bio-nanomaterials is crucial to preserve their functionality [ 15–17].
Biological matrixes such as body ﬂuids or tissues are considered more complex environments than
the examples mentioned above. For instance, how NPs behave in the blood is key for nanomedicines
designed for intravenous administration. Changes in the physicochemical properties of nanomaterials
upon interaction with body ﬂuids and tissues alter the pharmacokinetic response in terms of the
drug biological behavior and potential toxicity [18]. In this section, we present examples of HEDFM
applications in biomedicine.
Shannahan and co-workers studied the relation between nanoparticles and underlying
diseases [19]. Atherosclerosis is associated with the capacity of macrophages to uptake cholesterol
that leads to inﬂammation. Macrophages are also one of the ﬁrst immune cells in charge of detecting
and eliminating unidentiﬁed agents such as nanoparticles. Silver particles (AgNPs) and iron oxide
particles (IONPs) may compete with cholesterol for the scavenger receptors that macrophages
have on their surface, thus playing a key role in the metabolism and clearance of these different
materials. To study the immune system interactions under cholesterol inﬂuence, the researchers used
HEDFM to characterize the scattering properties of citrate-coated AgNPs of 20 and 110, and 20 nm
polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP)-coated IONPs, in the presence or absence of cholesterol (Figure 8). The
interaction between cholesterol and the surface of NPs alters the hydrodynamic size, the ζ-potential,
and the optical properties. Speciﬁcally, it was observed an important redshift of the spectral responses
of both 20 and 110 nm AgNPs upon interaction with cholesterol. This shift could be correlated with
changes in the refractive index of the nanoparticles resulting from cholesterol attachment. In the case
of the PVP-coated IONPs, the changes were less obvious, while the location of the band maximum
was preserved, and a spectral broadening occurred. It is worthy to say that both PVP and cholesterol

===== PDF PAGE 9 =====

Materials 2018, 11, 243 9 of 13
but not citrate have similar refractive indexes. This explains the higher differences in the scattering
properties for the citrate-coated nanoparticles compared to the PVP-coated counterparts of the same
size. Concerning the NP–immune cell interactions, the study elucidated that macrophages could
uptake almost all particles (AgNPs and IONPs) within the ﬁrst 2 h of a 24 h incubation. Toxic events
were not observed upon sequential or simultaneous exposure of macrophages to cholesterol and
nanoparticles. The presence of cholesterol had no effect in the NP internalization pattern for the 20 nm
particles (AgNPs and IONPs), nevertheless, it increased the uptake of the 110 nm AgNPs. Another
example using AgNPs on mastocytes was also investigated by the group of Shannahan. They reported
the degranulation of mastocytes, typically found in allergic reaction, investigating the effect of 20 nm
AgNPs functionalized with different coatings (citrate or PVP). The activation of the mastocytes was
not observed in the case of the 110 nm AgNPs for both coatings [18].
Materials 2018, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW  9 of 13 
 
coated counterparts of the same size. Concerni ng the NP–immune cell interactions, the study 
elucidated that macrophages could uptake almost all particles (AgNPs and IONPs) within the first 2 
h of a 24 h incubation. Toxic events were not observed upon sequential or simultaneous exposure of 
macrophages to cholesterol and nanoparticles. The pr esence of cholesterol had no effect in the NP 
internalization pattern for the 20 nm particles (A gNPs and IONPs), nevertheless, it increased the 
uptake of the 110 nm AgNPs. Another example using AgNPs on mastocytes was also investigated by 
the group of Shannahan. They reported the degranula tion of mastocytes, typically found in allergic 
reaction, investigating the effect of 20 nm AgNPs functionalized with different coatings (citrate or 
PVP). The activation of the mastocytes was not observed in the case of the 110 nm AgNPs for both 
coatings [18].  
 
Figure 8. Impact of cholesterol on the optical pr operties of silver and iron oxide NPs ( a) a 38 nm 
redshift is visible upon interaction of the 20 nm AgNP with cholesterol ; (b) a 99 nm redshift is visible, 
resulting from cholesterol interaction with the of 110 nm AgNP; ( c) only spectral broadening can be 
observed for the 20 nm IONPs maintaining the spectral maximum at 572 nm [20]. 
The ability to internalize hybrid plasmonic–superparamagnetic nanostructures by human breast 
cancer cells was reported in the work of Sotiriou et al [20]. A spectral library of the particles in water 
was generated and mapped in the different expe rimental conditions (Figure 9). Despite the 
heterogeneity of the spectral profiles, a great numb e r  o f  p i x e l s  w e r e  m a p p e d  i n  t h e  c a s e  o f  c e l l s  
exposed to nanoparticles, while for the control cells without particles no matches were found. The 
HEDFM method permitted the selection of the best  concentration of nanoparticles from the two 
tested concentrations (10 and 20 mg L −1). The highest concentration of nanostructures was 
subsequently employed in the photothermal ablation assays, demonstrating their potential for cancer 
treatment. Jenkins and co-workers used HEDFM to examine the colloidal stability of nanoparticles in 
blood [21]. The study focused on gold and silver plasmonic nanomaterials, well-known for their 
unique optoelectronic properties and their widespread use in biological applications. Therefore, 
nanoparticles presenting different states of agglomeration, fr om single particles to macroscopic 
agglomerates, were exposed to blood. Next, the au thors characterized the scattering responses and 
created the spectral libraries for each entity (F igure 10). Non-aggregated particles showed spectra 
with one wide main band, while the agglomerates  presented complex spectral signatures with 
multiple contributions. Next, to evaluate the colloidal stability, single particles were exposed to blood 
and incubated for 18 h. The researchers recorded a data cube for t = 5 min and a data cube for t = 18 
Figure 8. Impact of cholesterol on the optical properties of silver and iron oxide NPs ( a) a 38 nm
redshift is visible upon interaction of the 20 nm AgNP with cholesterol ; (b) a 99 nm redshift is visible,
resulting from cholesterol interaction with the of 110 nm AgNP; (c) only spectral broadening can be
observed for the 20 nm IONPs maintaining the spectral maximum at 572 nm [20].
The ability to internalize hybrid plasmonic–superparamagnetic nanostructures by human breast
cancer cells was reported in the work of Sotiriou et al [ 20]. A spectral library of the particles in
water was generated and mapped in the different experimental conditions (Figure 9). Despite
the heterogeneity of the spectral proﬁles, a great number of pixels were mapped in the case of
cells exposed to nanoparticles, while for the control cells without particles no matches were found.
The HEDFM method permitted the selection of the best concentration of nanoparticles from the
two tested concentrations (10 and 20 mg L−1). The highest concentration of nanostructures was
subsequently employed in the photothermal ablation assays, demonstrating their potential for cancer
treatment. Jenkins and co-workers used HEDFM to examine the colloidal stability of nanoparticles in
blood [21]. The study focused on gold and silver plasmonic nanomaterials, well-known for their unique
optoelectronic properties and their widespread use in biological applications. Therefore, nanoparticles
presenting different states of agglomeration, from single particles to macroscopic agglomerates, were
exposed to blood. Next, the authors characterized the scattering responses and created the spectral

===== PDF PAGE 10 =====

Materials 2018, 11, 243 10 of 13
libraries for each entity (Figure 10). Non-aggregated particles showed spectra with one wide main
band, while the agglomerates presented complex spectral signatures with multiple contributions. Next,
to evaluate the colloidal stability, single particles were exposed to blood and incubated for 18 h. The
researchers recorded a data cube for t = 5 min and a data cube for t = 18 h of incubation. The generated
spectral libraries concluded that the AuNPs presented higher colloidal stability over time. In the case
of AgNPs, the researchers evidenced the presence of agglomerated particles in the blood, pointing out
their potential toxicity for in vivo studies upon intravenous administration.
Materials 2018, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW  10 of 13 
 
h of incubation. The generated spectral libraries concluded that the AuNPs presented higher colloidal 
stability over time. In the case of AgNPs, the researchers evidenced the presence of agglomerated 
particles in the blood, pointing out their potential toxicity for in vivo studies upon intravenous 
administration. 
 
Figure 9. Mapping of hybrid nanostructures in human breast cancer cells to determine the optimal 
particle concentration for photothermal therapy. (a) Dark field image of the NPs; ( b) spectral library 
endmembers; ( c–e) dark field image of control cells an d cells exposed to 10 and 20 mg/L NP 
concentrations; (f–h) hyperspectral imaging of the spectral library demonstrating the presence of the 
particles in the cells (false-colored image) [21]. 
 
Figure 10.  Determination of the agglomeration stat e of gold and silver NPs in blood. ( a,b) AuNP 
spectral characterization at different agglomeration states; (c,d) spectral signatures of AuNPs in blood 
after 5 min and 18 h of exposure; ( e,f) spectral responses of the AgNP upon agglomeration; ( g,h) 
AgNPs in blood and their corresponding spectral profiles after 5 min and 18 h of exposure [13]. 
The investigation and analysis of nanomaterials in tissue sections using HEDFM require special 
attention. The steps required for the preparation of  the samples are prone to change the scattering 
properties of the nanomaterial. Fo r example, Sen et al. described a sh ift in the scattering spectra of 
gold-nanorods-labeled leucocytes (GNRLL) after exposing them to mounting media which presented 
a high refractive index [22]. They also reported th at the hematoxylin–eosin staining (utilized in the 
identification of anatomical structures) interfered with the signal of GNRLL in spleen and retina 
tissues. Moreover, they had to preserve the paraffin layer to avoid the loss of GNRLL present inside 
the blood vessels (non-anchored). Thus, while the optical recognition of the GNRLL in the dark field 
Figure 9. Mapping of hybrid nanostructures in human breast cancer cells to determine the optimal
particle concentration for photothermal therapy. (a) Dark ﬁeld image of the NPs; (b) spectral library
endmembers; ( c–e) dark ﬁeld image of control cells and cells exposed to 10 and 20 mg/L NP
concentrations; ( f–h) hyperspectral imaging of the spectral library demonstrating the presence of
the particles in the cells (false-colored image) [21].
Materials 2018, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW  10 of 13 
 
h of incubation. The generated spectral libraries concluded that the AuNPs presented higher colloidal 
stability over time. In the case of AgNPs, the researchers evidenced the presence of agglomerated 
particles in the blood, pointing out their potential toxicity for in vivo studies upon intravenous 
administration. 
 
Figure 9. Mapping of hybrid nanostructures in human breast cancer cells to determine the optimal 
particle concentration for photothermal therapy. (a) Dark field image of the NPs; ( b) spectral library 
endmembers; ( c–e) dark field image of control cells an d cells exposed to 10 and 20 mg/L NP 
concentrations; (f–h) hyperspectral imaging of the spectral library demonstrating the presence of the 
particles in the cells (false-colored image) [21]. 
 
Figure 10.  Determination of the agglomeration stat e of gold and silver NPs in blood. ( a,b) AuNP 
spectral characterization at different agglomeration states; (c,d) spectral signatures of AuNPs in blood 
after 5 min and 18 h of exposure; ( e,f) spectral responses of the AgNP upon agglomeration; ( g,h) 
AgNPs in blood and their corresponding spectral profiles after 5 min and 18 h of exposure [13]. 
The investigation and analysis of nanomaterials in tissue sections using HEDFM require special 
attention. The steps required for the preparation of  the samples are prone to change the scattering 
properties of the nanomaterial. Fo r example, Sen et al. described a sh ift in the scattering spectra of 
gold-nanorods-labeled leucocytes (GNRLL) after exposing them to mounting media which presented 
a high refractive index [22]. They also reported th at the hematoxylin–eosin staining (utilized in the 
identification of anatomical structures) interfered with the signal of GNRLL in spleen and retina 
tissues. Moreover, they had to preserve the paraffin layer to avoid the loss of GNRLL present inside 
the blood vessels (non-anchored). Thus, while the optical recognition of the GNRLL in the dark field 
Figure 10. Determination of the agglomeration state of gold and silver NPs in blood. ( a,b) AuNP
spectral characterization at different agglomeration states; (c,d) spectral signatures of AuNPs in blood
after 5 min and 18 h of exposure; (e,f) spectral responses of the AgNP upon agglomeration; (g,h) AgNPs
in blood and their corresponding spectral proﬁles after 5 min and 18 h of exposure [13].
The investigation and analysis of nanomaterials in tissue sections using HEDFM require special
attention. The steps required for the preparation of the samples are prone to change the scattering

===== PDF PAGE 11 =====

Materials 2018, 11, 243 11 of 13
properties of the nanomaterial. For example, Sen et al. described a shift in the scattering spectra of
gold-nanorods-labeled leucocytes (GNRLL) after exposing them to mounting media which presented
a high refractive index [22]. They also reported that the hematoxylin–eosin staining (utilized in the
identiﬁcation of anatomical structures) interfered with the signal of GNRLL in spleen and retina tissues.
Moreover, they had to preserve the parafﬁn layer to avoid the loss of GNRLL present inside the blood
vessels (non-anchored). Thus, while the optical recognition of the GNRLL in the dark ﬁeld image
was possible, the spectral characterization was disabled because of the inherent procedures during
tissue processing.
Wen et al. were able to spectrally differentiate the presence of three different nanosystems
inside brain histological sections [17,23]. They contemplated the following nanoparticles: theranostic
liposomes containing apomorphine and quantum dots (QDs), bare liposomes, and free QDs. Firstly,
they spectrally characterized the different NPs evidencing that each of them presented a speciﬁc
spectral signature. Although all the particles exhibited the ability to scatter light from the visible
to the near-infrared region, the shapes of the spectral proﬁles were different from each other and,
thus, distinguishable on tissue samples. All the particles were detected except the free QDs during
the mapping procedure of the spectral libraries in the brain data cubes. Despite the fact that both
types of liposomes were found, the multifunctional liposomes were detected at a signiﬁcantly higher
concentration than the bare liposomes, validating their brain-targeting functionality.
3. Conclusions
Nanomedicine is an emerging discipline capable to offer new perspectives to current medical
limitations. Novel imaging technologies are necessary tools to improve the fundamental knowledge in
bio-nano-interactions promoting advances at the diagnostic and therapeutic levels. In this context, the
HEDFM presents straightforward and rapid analysis of nanomaterials in their colloidal dispersion
state. The latter is of great importance to better understand the biointeractions of nanomaterials and
study their fate in the native aqueous environment of any biological system. However, the huge
amount of the generated data forming the hypercube require copious processing and careful analysis
to extract appropriate conclusive information. Many research reports use HEDFM to present spectral
differences or similarities, lacking both a linkage with the physicochemical background and a profound
interpretation of the ﬁndings. Nanomaterials with well-deﬁned optical properties are, by far, better
candidates for reproducible and representative analyses minimizing the variations derived from
particle polydispersity. As a ﬁnal remark, we anticipate that the HEDFM technology will be part of the
growing toolbox for the bionanotechnological development in modern health sciences.
This review highlights the great potential of HEDFM technology to shed light on the dynamic
interplay between nanomaterials and biological systems. Nanocomposites, at the single particle
level or collectively, can be tracked by exploiting the dark ﬁeld optics and characterized by their
spectral signatures. Furthermore, with this technique, a non-invasive and label-free bioanalysis is
possible, spanning from live cell and tissue studies to in vivo imaging of small organisms. We engaged
HEDFM analysis to elucidate the relationship between nanomaterials and their environment through
the monitoring of the optical response. We considered intrinsic factors of the nanomaterials, such
as morphology and composition, as well as extrinsic stimuli related to their environment and to
time. Examples of nanomaterial interactions in cells, blood, and tissues were presented for their
biomedical relevance, and to show the applicability of the methodology in complex biological matrixes.
To facilitate a comprehensive understanding of the methodology, we introduced the reader to the
hyperspectral data acquisition and analysis.
Supplementary Materials: The following are available online at www.mdpi.com/1996-1944/11/2/243/s1,
Figure S1: Mean spectral responses and dark ﬁeld images of PS, PS-RB, PS-QD, and PS-MB particles. Figure S2:
Hyperspectral analysis of AuCuS NPs at pH 4 and 7. Figure S3: Hyperspectral analysis of AuNSs in ethanol and
PBS. Figure S4: Hyperspectral analysis of PM-AuNPs in ethanol and GM. Figure S5: Spectral response of AuCuS
NPs in GM after 8 months. Figure S6: Mean and single particle spectral analysis of 100 nm AuNPs in water. Figure
S7-A: Spectral behavior of 100 nm AuNPs inside the cell. Figure S7-B: Cell maintenance and sample preparation.

===== PDF PAGE 12 =====

Materials 2018, 11, 243 12 of 13
Acknowledgments: DT (FJCI-2014-22398), PZP (BES-2015-075020 and MDM-2014-0370-04), and PRG
(RYC-2012-10059, CTQ2013-45433-P[FEDER] and MDM-2014-0370-04) acknowledge the Ministry of Economy,
Industry, and Competitiveness (MINECO), while PRG and RX acknowledges the China Scholarship Council (File
No. 201606220083) for ﬁnancial support.
Author Contributions: PZ-P designed and performed the experiments, analyzed the data, and wrote/revised the
manuscript; DT designed and performed the experiments, analyzed the data, and wrote/revised the manuscript;
RX analyzed the data; PRG conceived the study, designed the experiments, analyzed the data and wrote/revised
the manuscript.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Verebes, G.S.; Melchiorre, M.; Garcia-Leis, A.; Ferreri, C.; Marzetti, C.; Torreggiani, A. Hyperspectral
enhanced dark ﬁeld microscopy for imaging blood cells. J. Biophotonics 2013, 6, 960–967. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
2. Xiao, L.; Yeung, E.S. Optical Imaging of individual plasmonic nanoparticles in biological samples. Annu. Rev.
Anal. Chem. 2014, 7, 89–111. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3. Fairbairn, N.; Christoﬁdou, A.; Kanaras, A.G.; Newman, T.A.; Muskens, O.L. Hyperspectral darkﬁeld
microscopy of single hollow gold nanoparticles for biomedical applications. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2013,
15, 4163–4168. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
4. Hu, H.; Ma, C.; Liu, Z. Plasmonic dark ﬁeld microscopy. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2010, 96, 113107. [CrossRef]
5. Gao, L.; Smith, R.T. Optical hyperspectral imaging in microscopy and spectroscopy—A review of data
acquisition. J. Biophotonics 2015, 8, 441–456. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
6. Théoret, T.; Wilkinson, K.J. Evaluation of enhanced darkﬁeld microscopy and hyperspectral analysis to
analyse the fate of silver nanoparticles in wastewaters. Anal. Methods 2017, 9, 3920–3928. [CrossRef]
7. Vainrub, A.; Pustovyy, O.; Vodyanoy, V . Resolution of 90 nm (λ/5) in an optical transmission microscope
with an annular condenser. Opt. Lett. 2006, 31, 2855–2857. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
8. Zamora-Perez, P .; Pélaz, B.; Tsoutsi, D.; Parak, W.; Rivera Gil, P . Hyperspectral enhanced darkﬁeld imaging
of individual and collective hyperthermia-driven gold-copper sulﬁde nanoparticles. J. Nanobiotechnol. 2018,
submitted.
9. Gowen, A.A.; Feng, Y.; Gaston, E.; Valdramidis, V . Recent applications of hyperspectral imaging in
microbiology. T alanta2015, 137, 43–54. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
10. Patskovsky, S.; Bergeron, E.; Rioux, D.; Simard, M.; Meunier, M. Hyperspectral reﬂected light microscopy
of plasmonic Au/Ag alloy nanoparticles incubated as multiplex chromatic biomarkers with cancer cells.
Analyst 2014, 139, 5247–5253. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
11. Patskovsky, S.; Bergeron, E.; Meunier, M. Hyperspectral darkﬁeld microscopy of PEGylated gold
nanoparticles targeting CD44-expressing cancer cells. J. Biophotonics 2015, 8, 162–167. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
12. Mortimer, M.; Gogos, A.; Bartolome, N.; Kahru, A.; Bucheli, T.D.; Slaveykova, V .I. Potential of hyperspectral
imaging microscopy for semi-quantitative analysis of nanoparticle uptake by protozoa. Environ. Sci. T echnol.
2014, 48, 8760–8767. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
13. Rivera Gil, P .; Oberdörster, G.; Elder, A.; Puntes, V .; Parak, W.J. Correlating physico-chemical with
toxicological properties of nanoparticles: The present and the future.ACS Nano 2010, 4, 5227–5231. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
14. Soenen, S.J.; Rivera-Gil, P .; Montenegro, J.M.; Parak, W.J.; De Smedt, S.C.; Braeckmans, K. Cellular toxicity of
inorganic nanoparticles: Common aspects and guidelines for improved nanotoxicity evaluation. Nano T oday
2011, 6, 446–465. [CrossRef]
15. Rivera-Gil, P .; Jimenez De Aberasturi, D.; Wulf, V .; Pelaz, B.; Del Pino, P .; Zhao, Y.; De La Fuente, J.M.;
Ruiz De Larramendi, I.; Rojo, T.; Liang, X.J.; et al. The challenge to relate the physicochemical properties of
colloidal nanoparticles to their cytotoxicity. Acc. Chem. Res. 2012, 46, 743–749. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
16. Shannahan, J.H.; Sowrirajan, H.; Persaud, I.; Podila, R.; Brown, J.M. Impact of silver and iron nanoparticle
exposure on cholesterol uptake by macrophages. J. Nanomater. 2015, 2015. [CrossRef]
17. Aldossari, A.A.; Shannahan, J.H.; Podila, R.; Brown, J.M. Inﬂuence of physicochemical properties of silver
nanoparticles on mast cell activation and degranulation. T oxicol. In Vitro 2015, 29, 195–203. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

===== PDF PAGE 13 =====

Materials 2018, 11, 243 13 of 13
18. Sotiriou, G.A.; Starsich, F.; Dasargyri, A.; Wurnig, M.C.; Krumeich, F.; Boss, A.; Leroux, J.C.; Pratsinis, S.E.
Photothermal killing of cancer cells by the controlled plasmonic coupling of silica-coated Au/Fe2O3
nanoaggregates. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2014, 24, 2818–2827. [CrossRef]
19. Jenkins, S.V .; Qu, H.; Mudalige, T.; Ingle, T.M.; Wang, R.; Wang, F.; Howard, P .C.; Chen, J.; Zhang, Y. Rapid
determination of plasmonic nanoparticle agglomeration status in blood. Biomaterials 2015, 51, 226–237.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
20. Sen, D.; SoRelle, E.D.; Liba, O.; Dalal, R.; Paulus, Y.M.; Kim, T.-W.; Moshfeghi, D.M.; de la Zerda, A.
High-resolution contrast-enhanced optical coherence tomography in mice retinae. J. Biomed. Opt. 2016, 21,
066002. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
21. Wen, C.J.; Zhang, L.W.; Al-Suwayeh, S.A.; Yen, T.C.; Fang, J.Y. Theranostic liposomes loaded with quantum
dots and apomorphine for brain targeting and bioimaging. Int. J. Nanomed. 2012, 7, 1599–1611. [CrossRef]
22. Pandian Senthil, K.; Isabel, P .-S.; Benito, R.-G.; de Abajo, F.J.G.; Luis, M.L.-M. High-yield synthesis and
optical response of gold nanostars. Nanotechnology 2008, 19, 015606. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
23. Sanles-Sobrido, M.; Exner, W.; Rodrıguez-Lorenzo, L.; Rodrıguez-Gonzalez, B.; Correa-Duarte, M.A.;
Alvarez-Puebla, R.A.; Liz-Marzan, L.M. Design of SERS-encoded, submicron, hollow particles nanoparticles.
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2009, 131, 2699–2705. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
© 2018 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).